0   The Infernal Comedy
John Malkovich makes his UMS debut portraying a dead serial killer who returns to the stage to present his autobiography in a public reading. Malkovich appears as part of a theatrical opera of sorts that features a 40-piece chamber orchestra and two sopranos telling the real-life story of Jack Unterweger, a convicted murderer and acclaimed prison poet. Pardoned by the Austrian president Kurt Waldheim in 1990 at the behest of the Viennese literati, Unterweger’s public “rehabilitation” was anything but — within two years, he had been arrested and convicted for the brutal murder of 11 prostitutes in three countries. This gripping performance uses arias and music by Gluck, Vivaldi, Mozart, Beethoven, Boccherini, and Haydn as the counterpoint to Malkovich’s chilling monologue, which shifts between reality and delusion.
Music underpinning speech looks back to an almost entirely forgotten 18th- and early 19th- century tradition, the melodrama. There are melo­dramas in Mozart's opera Zaide, and Beethoven acknowledges the form when Rocco and Leonora are digging Florestan's grave in Fidelio. Weber uses the same device in the "Wolf's Glen" scene in Der Freischutz. Music raises the emotional temperature of the drama, hinting at things that cannot be said. Then there are two sopranos on stage, perform­ing arias by Vivaldi, Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn, and Weber. They depict heroines from the Baroque and early classical periods singing of their grief and torment, their fury and their resignation— the emotional red meat of opera and the concert aria. "The two sopranos begin as concert singers," Sturminger explains, "artists who are going to pro­ vide a bit of classical music between Unterweger's monologues, but gradually they become characters in his life. Not always as definite characters with names but their stories and Jack's life story some­ how merge together." Malkovich takes up the idea. "Their arias are chosen to represent the women in Unterweger's life, all of whom were victims in some way or another. He victimized just about every woman he met and so they kind of call him out from the grave in the piece." What is so modern about this dramatic idea is the blending of the elaborate and often highly artificial musical worlds of Baroque and early clas­sical arias with the low-life history of a serial killer who was also a modern celebrity. It's as if Handel had turned Truman Capote's In Cold Blood into an opera. John Malkovich believes "that's why it works. There's a kind of pure God-given talent such as Mozart's, that affirms all of mankind's potential for creating beauty, set against Unterweger, who encapsulates mankind's potential for mayhem and cruelty. I think that this mix, which was Martin Haselbock's idea, is unusually potent." The potency of powerful music combined with dangerous emotions: the very stuff of music theater.

1   Yuja Wang, piano
Chinese pianist Yuja Wang combines the spontaneity and fearless imagination of youth with the discipline and precision of a mature artist. Regularly lauded for her controlled and prodigious technique, her command of the piano has been described as "astounding" and "superhuman." Born in Beijing in 1987, Yuja began studying piano at age six, with her earliest public performances taking place in China, Australia, and Germany. She went on to study at the Central Conservatory of Music in Beijing under Ling Yuan and Zhou Guangren. She has been praised for her authority over the most complex technical demands of the repertoire, the depth of her musical insight, her fresh interpretations, and her graceful, charismatic stage presence.
Yuma’s command of the piano has been described as "astounding" and "superhuman," and she has been praised for her authority over the most complex technical demands of the repertoire, the depth of her musical insight, as well as her fresh interpretations and graceful, charismatic stage presence. Following her San Francisco recital debut, The San Francisco Chronicle wrote "The arrival of Chinese-born pianist Yuja Wang on the musical scene is an exhilarating and unnerving development. To listen to her in action is to re-examine whatever assumptions you may have had about how well the piano can actually be played."
In the few short years since her 2005 debut with the National Arts Center Orchestra in Ottawa, Yuja has already performed with many of the world's prestigious orchestras including the Boston Symphony, Chicago Symphony, Cleveland Orchestra, Dallas Symphony, Detroit Symphony, Houston Symphony, Los Angeles Philharmonic, National Symphony, New York Philharmonic, Philadelphia Orchestra, Pittsburgh Orchestra, and the San Francisco Symphony, in the US, and abroad with Berlin Staatskapelle, Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra, Tonhalle Orchestra, China Philharmonic, Filarmonica della Scala, London Philharmonic, NHK Symphony in Tokyo, Orchestre de Paris, and Orquesta Nacional Espana. She has worked with many of the world's esteemed conductors including Claudio Abbado, Daniel Barenboim, Charles Dutoit, Daniele Gatti, Manfred Honeck, Pietari Inkinen, Lorin Maazel, Kurt Masur, Sir Roger Norrington, Antonio Pappano, Yuri Temirkanov, Michael Tilson Thomas, and Pinchas Zukerman. Yuja has given recitals in major cities throughout Asia, Europe, and North America, makes regular appearances at festivals, and is a dedicated performer of chamber music.In the current season, Yuja will perform with the Israel Philharmonic, La Scala, London Symphony, NDR Symphony, and Santa Cecilia in Europe, and the US orchestras of New York, Philadelphia, and Los Angeles. She makes her Carnegie Hall recital debut (Stern Hall) this October.Yuja is an exclusive recording artist for Deutsche Grammophon. Her debut recording, titled Sonatas & Etudes, was released in spring 2009, and was followed by a second recording. Transformation, in spring 2010. Most recently, Yuja collabo- rated with Maestro Abbado and the Mahler Chamber Orchestra to record her first concerto album featuring Rachmaninoff's / Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganiniand his Piano Concerto No. 2 in c minor.
Born in Beijing, Yuja began studying piano privately at age six, and then at the Central Conservatory of Music in Beijing. She studied at Calgary's Mount Royal College Conservatory from 1999-2001, and then moved to the US at age15 to study with Gary Graffman at The Curtis Institute of Music, where she graduated in 2008. In 2006, Yuja received the Gilmore Young Artist Award. In 2010 she was awarded the Avery Fisher Career Grant.

2   London Philharmonic
The London Philharmonic returns for its first appearance since November 2006, this time under the direction of the exciting young conductor Vladimir Jurowski, who became the orchestra’s principal conductor in 2007, succeeding Kurt Masur. Jurowski conducts Tchaikovsky’s Manfred Symphony, the only one of Tchaikovsky’s symphonies that is not numbered. Based on a poem by Lord Byron, the Manfred Symphony is rarely performed in the concert hall. Janine Jansen, a 23-year-old violinist who has been a huge star in her native Holland ever since her Concertgebouw debut at the age of 10, makes her UMS debut.
The London Philharmonic Orchestra (LPO) is one of the world's best-known orches­tras, balancing a long and distinguished history with a reputation as one of the UK's most forward-looking orchestras. As well as performing classical concerts, the Orchestra also records film and computer game soundtracks, has its own re­ cord label, and reaches thousands of Londoners every year through activities for schools and local communities. The Orchestra was founded by Sir Thomas Bee- cham in 1932, and since then has been headed by many great conductors including Sir Adrian Boult, Bernard Haitink, Sir Georg Solti, Klaus Tennstedt, and Kurt Masur. The current Principal Conductor is Vladimir Jurowski, appointed in 2007, with Yan- nick Nezet-Seguin as Principal Guest Conductor. The LPO has been performing at Southbank Centre's Royal Festival Hall since it opened in 1951, becoming Resident Orchestra in 1992. It also has flourishing residencies in Brighton and Eastbourne, and in summer it plays for Glyndebourne Festival Opera where it has been the Resident Symphony Orchestra since 1964. The LPO tours internationally and in the 11/12 season will visit Belgium, Switzerland, Germany, the US, Spain, China, Russia, Oman, Brazil, and France. Having long been embraced by the record­ ing, broadcasting, and film industries, the LPO broadcasts regularly on television and radio. It also works with the Hollywood and UK film industries, recording soundtracks for blockbuster motion pic­ tures including the Oscar-winning score for The Lord of the Rings trilogy. In 2005 it established its own record label.

3   Hamburg Symphony
In 1971, French composer Olivier Messiaen was commissioned by Alice Tully, the New York philanthropist most widely known for her contribution to Lincoln Center, to write a piece commemorating America’s Bicentennial. Messiaen was inspired and fascinated by the natural wonder he found in the landscapes of the American West.Des canyons aux étoiles (From the Canyons to the Stars) represents his sonic impressions of America’s last untouched frontier. Conductor Jeffrey Tate and the Hamburg Symphony Orchestra, in collaboration with Israeli filmmaker Daniel Landau, bring the piece alive in a new cinematic installation, where images of man’s impact on the environment create a counterpoint to sounds of untouched nature. Through film images projected on multiple screens, Hill Auditorium will be turned into a multi-sensory experience celebrating the beauty of the earth and our unaltered landscapes.
For more than five decades, the Hamburg Symphony Orchestra has been one of the freshest and most original of the city's ensembles, with both a national and international reputation. As the orchestra in residence at the Laeiszhalle, one of Europe's most renowned concert halls, the Hamburg Symphony is firmly anchored in the city's musical life and plays a leading role in the development of Hamburg's plan to establish itself as a Musical Metropolis. The distinguished Principal Conductor, Jeffrey Tate, and Daniel Kuhnel, the General Manager and Artistic Director, have created a distinct profile for the orchestra with exciting performances of innovative repertoire since the beginning of their collaboration in 2009. Partly as a result of these programming policies, which have become an integral part of the orchestra's identity, Tate and Kuhnel have succeeded in the past three years in increasing the number of visitors to their concerts by 56 percent.
With a special intuition for extraordinary young artists, the orchestra established an Artist in Residence position in 2008, engaging such performers as clarinetist Martin Frost, harpist Xavier de Maistre, young pianist and crossover musician Francesco Tristano, and violinist Guy Braunstein, each of whom has worked with the orchestra for an entire season.In addition, through the engagement of celebrated international soloists and conductors, the Hamburg Symphony strives to give the city an unmistakable musical identity with an impact on all areas of life, something that can be heard and experienced by every citizen and which resonates beyond the city's borders. Daniel Kuhnel feels, "The attempt to live and embody this ambition for artistic excellence, so close to our own sense of ourselves and our audience, is an exciting, worthwhile, and necessary balancing act."The Hamburg Symphony Orchestra joins with the other participants in the city's musical life to give it a unique voice. With new accents in Hamburg's musical landscape, the orchestra attempts to realize its hopes for excellence, originality, and audience contact. Building upon its traditional summer series of open-air concerts in the inner courtyard of Hamburg's City Hall, the orchestra presented the festival "Transformations" in the summer of 2011, in which the six movements of Gustav Mahler's Dos Lied von der Erde performed individually in six different locations throughout the city along with thematically related works by other composers. The success of such programming concepts underscores Hamburg's potential as a modern and lively musical metropolis, supporting the orchestra's vision and Kuhnel when he says, "we cannot preach and talk about a musical metropolis without actively working for its development and trying to provide content for this still rather abstract idea."In the discussion of sociopolitical issues, the Hamburg Symphony considers orchestras in general, and itself in particular, to be musical centers of expertise, which through the continual encounter with a non-spatial art acquire a particular knowledge informing their relationship to our perception of time. The Hamburg Symphony Orchestra believes in articulating sociopolitical themes through music and proposes the acceptance of a musical standard for social action.The orchestra's season reflects this view of itself. The Hamburg Symphony can be heard in two subscription series, a broad selection of unusual special concerts produced by the orchestra itself, a distinguished subscription series of chamber music concerts, a popular sequence of vocal recitals, concerts devoted to famous silent films with live orchestral music, and a broad range of events for children and young people; the latter includes, in addition to the series of children's concerts, a rapidly expanding educational outreach program in which members of the orchestra work closely with schools and other social programs.Of particular importance for the Hamburg Symphony Orchestra is a modern, long-term, and socially conscious approach to a broader understanding of musical culture.The Hamburg Symphony's activities are attracting a growing international interest. As the "thinking orchestra" of an emerging musical metropolis, the Hamburg Symphony is on the way to establishing itself as one of the most interesting ensembles touring internationally, without compromising its identity or traditions.

4   Chicago Symphony Orc
The Chicago Symphony Orchestra is consistently hailed as one of today's leading orchestras. In the 2010/11 season-the Orchestra's 120th-Riccardo Muti began his tenure as the CSO's 10th music director.Throughout its history. the Chicago Symphony Orchestra has enjoyed leadership from an illustrious list of music directors. beginning with Theodore Thomas. who founded the Orchestra in 1891, followed by Frederick Stock. Desire Defauw. Artur Rodzinski. Rafael Kubelik, Fritz Reiner, Jean Martinon, Sir George Solti, and Daniel Barenboim. From 2006 to 2010, Bernard Haitink led the Orchestra as principal conductor. the first in history. Pierre Boutez, who was appointed principal guest conductor in 1995. has served as Helen Regenstein Conductor Emeritus since 2006.The CSO performs well over 150 concerts each year at Symphony Center and at the Ravinia Festival, where it is in residence each summer. The ensemble has embarked on 38 overseas tours since Sir Georg Solti led the first European tour in 1971, most recently visiting Italy and Russia in Spring 2012, making that trip the 29th tour to Europe and second to Russia. The CSO has traveled to the Far East six times as well as once each to Australia and South America.Recording has been a significant part of the CSO's history since 1916, and in 2007 the Orchestra launched its own record label, CSO Resound. CSO recordings have earned 62 Grammy Awards from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. most recently in 2011 for "Best Classical Album" and "Best Choral Performance" for Verdi"s Requiem conducted by Riccardo Muti.In 2007, the CSO returned to the national airwaves with its self-produced weekly broadcast series, which is syndicated to more than 300 markets nationwide on the WFMT Radio Network as well as on cso.org. Also that year, the CSO expanded its online presence with free video downloads of its innovative Beyond the Score presentations.The Chicago Symphony Orchestra Association also is the parent organization for the Chicago Symphony Chorus; Civic Orchestra of Chicago; the Symphony Center Presents concert series; The Institute for Learning, Access and Training; and the Symphony Center facility. Symphony Center Presents, the organization's presentation arm. offers more than 50 diverse performances each year, including piano and chamber recitals. visiting orchestras, jazz, world music, and the MusicNOW contemporary series.Mason Bates and Anna Clyne are the CSO·s Mead Composers-in-Residence, having taken up their posts in the 2010/11 season. They curate the MusicNOW series along with principal conductor Cliff Colnot and work with Maestro Muti to reach across traditional barriers and into the Chicago community.The Institute for Learning, Access and Training at the CSO, launched in October 2008, engages more than 200,000 Chicago-area residents annually. Under the auspices of the Institute, Yo-Yo Ma, who became the first judson and Joyce Green Creative Consultant in January 2010, serves as an invaluable partner to Maestro Muti, CSO staff, and musicians by participating in the development of new initiatives and music series.Bank of America is the Global Sponsor of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

5   San Francisco Sympho
Michael Tilson Thomas and the San Francisco Symphony return with their specialty: Mahler. MTT has been associated with the San Francisco Symphony since his first guest conducting appearance in 1974, and their Mahler Project, a 17-disc set recorded over an eight-year period of all of the composer’s symphonies and works for voice with orchestra, has won seven Grammy awards.
This appearance by the San Francisco Symphony celebrates the 70th birthday of music director Michael Tilson Thomas with one of his signature specialties: Mahler’s Symphony No. 7, a work that shows Mahler at his most mysterious, with a tantalizing nocturnal quality.
The SAN FRANCISCO SYMPHONY (SFS) gave its first concerts in December 1911. Its music directors have included Henry Hadley, Alfred Hertz, Basil Cameron. Issay Dobrowen Pierre Monteux, Enrique Jorda Josef Krips, Seiji Ozawa Edo de W aart Herbert Blornstedt,and since 1995, Michael Tilson Thomas.The SFS has won such recording awards as France's Grand Prix du Disque, Britain's Gramophone Award and Grammy Awards. For RCA Red Seal Michael Tilson Thomas and the SFS have recorded music from Prokofiev's Romeo and Juliet, Berlioz's Symphonie fantastique, two Copland collections, a Gershwin collection. Stravinsky ballets (Le Sacre du printemps, The Firebird, and Persephone), and Charles lves: An American Journey. Their cycle of Mahler symphonies has received seven Grammys and is available on the Symphony's own label SFS Media.The recording of John Adams's Harmonielehre and Short Ride in a Fast Machine won the 2013 Grammy Award for "Best Orchestral Performance: Some of the most important conductors of the past and recent years have been guests on the SFS podium. among them Bruno Walter, Leopold Stokowski, Leonard Bernstein. and Sir Georg Solti,and the list of composers who have led the Orchestra includes Stravinsky, Ravel, Copland and John Adams.The SFS Youth Orchestra founded in 1980, has become known around the world as has the SFS Chorus heard on recordings and on the soundtracks of such films as Amadeus and Godfather III. For two decades, the SFS Adventures in Music program has brought music to every child in grades one through five in San Francisco's public schools. SFS radio broadcasts, the first in the US to feature symphonic music when they began in 1926, today carry the Orchestra's concerts across the country.

6   Pavel Haas Quartet
“The world’s most exciting string quartet? Well, they suit the tagline better than most. Their tone is large, quasi-orchestral. They take risks. Above all, they play with passion.” (The Times,, London) Based in Prague, the Pavel Haas Quartet is named for Czech composer Pavel Haas, who was imprisoned at Theresienstadt and died at Auschwitz in 1944. While the Quartet is passionately committed to the Czech repertoire, and particularly the three wonderful string quartets that Haas composed (including the one on this program, scored for string quartet and percussion), all their performances receive extraordinary acclaim. “In a class of their own…”
Since winning the Paolo Borciani competition in Italy in Spring 2005, the Pavel Haas Quartet has performed at the world's most prestigious concert halls and recorded four award- winning CDs, receiving great acclaim from audiences and critics alike.
In the current season, the Quartet performs concerts at the Concertgebouw Amsterdam, Theatre des Champs-Elysees Paris, Zurich Tonalle, Vienna Konzerthaus, Munich Herkulessaal, and Wigmore Hall in London, as well as major venues in Brussels, Stockholm, Copenhagen, and Madrid. The Quartet tours Hong Kong and Japan, appear- ing in Tokyo, Osaka, Nagoya, and Yokohama, and visits the US for a national tour culminating in performances in Ann Arbor and at Carnegie Hall. In October 2011 the Quartet was awarded the prestigious "Record of the Year" at the Gramophone Awards for its recent recording of Dvorak's String Quartets, No. 12 in F Major and Wo. 13 in G Major on Supraphon.
Other recent highlights for the Quartet include performances at the Rheingau Festival, the Schubertiade, San Francisco Performances, and a return to the Auditorio Nacional in Madrid. In 2007, the Cologne Philharmonic nominated the Quartet as ECHO Rising Stars, resulting in a tour to major concert halls worldwide. The Quartet took part in the BBC New Generation Artists scheme from 2007-2009, and in 2010 was awarded the 2010 Special Ensemble Scholarship of the Borletti-Buitoni Trust. The 2010/11 season saw the Quartet begin a three-year residency as Artists-in-Residence of Glasgow Royal Concert Halls.
The Pavel Haas Quartet has released four discs on the Supraphon label. Their most recent record- ing, the aforementioned disc of Dvorak's string quartets, was released in autumn 2010 and won widespread critical acclaim: The Sunday Times awarded the recording five stars, commenting: "Their account of the 'American' Quartet belongs alongside the greatest performances on disc. In this repertoire, they are simply matchless today." They won the Diapason d'Or de I'Annee for their disc featuring Prokofiev's String Quartets Nos. 1 and 2 and Sonata for Two Violins, with Diapason commenting "This is now the definitive record- ing of the Prokofiev quartets...to be discovered without hesitation." Their first two recordings were equally well received. Their first recording of Janacek Quartet No. 2 ("Intimate Letters") and Haas Quartet No. 2 ("From the Monkey Mountains”) was voted one of the CDs of 2006 by The Daily Telegraph and received a 2007 Gramophone Award. The Quartet's second disc saw them complete their recordings of the string quartet works by Haas and Janacek.Based in Prague, the Quartet studied with Mi- lan Skampa, the legendary violist of the Smetana Quartet, and continues to enjoy a close relation- ship with him. The Quartet also has worked with several other masters of the quartet world, including members of Quartetto Italiano, Quatuor Mosaiques, Borodin Quartet, and Amadeus Quartet, as well as with Walter Levin in Basel.

7   Ballet Preljocaj
Few audience members in attendance at Ballet Preljocaj’s 2012 performances of Snow White will forget the company’s astonishing creativity and extraordinary dancing. And Then, One Thousand Years of Peace, which will be seen only at UMS and at BAM, was first created by Angelin Preljocaj for the Bolshoi Ballet in 2010 and takes inspiration from the vision of apocalypse conjured by St. John in the biblical Book of Revelation. It is, he says, about the lifting (“apo”) of the veil (“calypsis”) of things in our world that are hidden from view, rather than a depiction of biblical or global catastrophe. Set to a pulsating soundtrack, the piece combines intricate, edgy action with slow, graceful movement in an ever-evolving dance that reveals our innermost hopes, desires, and fears. “A huge, ambitious monolith of a work.” (The Guardian)
It’s been more than a decade since Ballet Preljocaj (pronounced prezh-oh-kahzh) made its UMS debut, but this production of Snow White, created in 2008, will be well worth the wait. Angelin Preljocaj has created a work for all 26 dancers of his company, setting the Grimm brothers’ version of the fairytale to the most beautiful scores of Gustav Mahler’s symphonies for this contemporary ballet. With costumes designed by Jean Paul Gaultier, this production of Snow White is sure to shake up those who have grown up with only the Disney version at their disposal. “I was very keen to tell a story, offer something magical and enchanted,” says Preljocaj. At the same time, he approaches Snow White’s stepmother, the Queen, as the centerpiece of the story, representing the conflict of her own longing to be desirable and seductive while watching her daughter grow up.
Created in December 1984, BALLET PRELJOCAJ became the National Choreographic Centre of Champigny-sur-Marne and Val-de-Marne in 1989. In 1996, the company was welcomed at the Cite du livre in Aix-en-Provence and became the Ballet Preljocaj - National Choreographic Centre of the Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur Region, the Bouches-du-Rhone Department the Pays d'Aix Community, and the Oty of Aix-en-Provence.Since founding his company, now composed of 26 dancers, Angelin Preljocaj has created 47 choreographic works, ranging from solo to larger formations. The company performs about 100 performances per year on tour in France and abroad. His creations have been restaged by numerous other repertory companies, from which he also receives commissions to create new pieces.Beyond repertory performances, Ballet Preljocaj has grown its local activity in Aix- en-Provence and neighboring communities in order to share its passion for dance with a broader public presenting lectures on dance interpretation through video, public rehearsals, contemporary dance classes and workshops, and dance interventions in urban public space, all means of viewing and understanding dance from different perspectives.

8   Joshua Bell
Often referred to as a “poet of the violin,” Joshua Bell enchants audiences with his breathtaking virtuosity, sheer beauty, and charismatic stage presence. His restless curiosity, passion, universal appeal, and multi-faceted musical interests have been developed from age four, when his parents noticed him plucking tunes with rubber bands that he had stretched around the handles of his dresser drawers. His first US tour as music director of the Academy of St. Martin in the Fields, which included the 2012 Ford Honors Program in Ann Arbor, resulted in rock concert enthusiasm from audiences. He returns now to perform a Valentine’s weekend recital.
Superstar violinist Joshua Bell attacks the stunning Beethoven Concerto with his breathtaking virtuosity and sumptuous tone and leads the rest of the program from the concertmaster’s chair.
An Avery Fisher Prize recipient Mr. Bell received the New York Recording Academy Honors in June 2013. Recently appointed Music Director of the Academy of St. Martin-in- the-Fields. Mr. Bell is the first person to hold this title since Sir Neville Marriner formed the orchestra in 1958. Their first recording under Mr. Bell's leadership of Beethoven's Symphony Nos. 4 and 7 from Sony Classical debuted in February 2013 at No. 1 on the Billboard Classical chart and they will next record the Bach violin concertos.Last fall Mr. Bell performed a South American recital tour with pianist Alessio Bax and a European tour with the Academy of St. Martin-in-the-Fields. Mr. Bell also guests with the Houston. Dallas. and St. Louis symphonies.In 2014. he reunites with his beloved Academy of St. Martin-in-the-Fields, directing Beethoven's Symphony Nos. 3 and 5. He will also perform the Brahms concerto with the Vienna Philharmonic under the baton of Paavo Jarvi. and the Sibelius with Gustavo Dudamel conducting the Los Angeles Philharmonic. The current US recital tour with Sam Haywood. a perfonnance at the Kennedy Center with the National Symphony Orchestra and dates with the Los Angeles Philharmonic round out the seasonIn 2007, Joshua Bell performed incognito in a Washington. DC subway station for a Washington Post story examining art and context. The story earned writer Gene Weingarten a Pulitzer Prize and sparked an international firestorm of discussion The conversation continues to this day, thanks in part to the September 2013 publication of the illustrated children's book. The Man With the Violin by Kathy Stinson. illustrated by Dusan Petricic from Annick Press.Mr. Bell has recorded more than 40 CDs garnering Mercury, Grammy, Gramophone, and Echo Klassik awards. His first holiday CD, released last fall and entitled Musical Gifts From Joshua Bell and Friends features collaborations with artists including Chris Botti, Kristin Chenoweth, Chick Corea Gloria Estefan. Renee Fleming. Placido Domingo, and Alison Krauss. Recent releases include French Impressions with pianist Jeremy Denk, the eclectic At Home With Friends, the Defiance soundtrack, Vivaldi's The Four Seasons, Tchaikovsky's Violin Concerto with the Berlin Philharmonic, The Red Violin Concerto, Voice of the Violin, and Romance of the Violin, which Billboard named the 2004 “Classical CD of the Year,” and Mr. Bell the “Classical Artist of the Year.” His discography encompasses critically acclaimed performances of the major violin repertoire in addition to John Corigliano's Oscar-winning soundtrack, The Red Violin.
Born in Bloomington. Indiana Mr. Bell received his first violin at age four and at 12 began studying with Josef Gingold at Indiana University. Two years later he came to national attention in his debut with Riccardo Muti and the Philadelphia Orchestra and, at 17, debuted at Carnegie Hall. Mr. Bell's career has now spanned over 30 years as a soloist, chamber musician. recording artist, and conductor.Joshua Bell performs on the 1713 Huberman Stradivarius.

9   Murray Perahia
In the more than 35 years he has been performing on the concert stage, Murray Perahia has become one of the most cherished pianists of our time.
Anyone who has heard one of Murray Perahia’s previous 11 UMS appearances would have to agree with the assessment of The Los Angeles Times: “Perahia is a marvel.” The notes, “Perahia may be the closest thing to a pure conduit of music — one in which the imagination and skill of the player are entirely at the service of the composer, not the player’s ego…The soul of a poet, the mind of a thinker, the hands of a virtuoso: No wonder audiences love this guy.”
In the more than 35 years he has been performing on the concert stage. American pianist MURRAY PERAHlA has become one of the most sought-after and cherished pianists of our time. performing in all of the major international music centers and with every leading orchestra. He is the Principal Guest Conductor of the Academy of st. Martin in the Fields.Born in New York, Mr. Perahia started playing piano at the age of four. and later attended Mannes College where he majored in conducting and composition. His summers were spent at the Marlboro Festival, where he collaborated with such musicians as Rudolf Serkin, Pablo Casals. and the members of the Budapest String Quartet. He also studied at the time with Mieczyslaw Horszowski. In subsequent years, he developed a close friendship with Vladimir Horowitz. whose perspective and personality were an abiding inspiration. In 1972, Mr. Perahia won the Leeds International Piano Competition and in 1973 he gave his first concert at the Aldeburgh Festival, where he worked closely with Benjamin Britten and Peter Pears, accompanying the latter in many lieder recitals. Mr. Perahia was co-artistic director of the Festival from 1981 to 1989.Mr. Perahia has a wide and varied discography. His most recent release. Brahms: Handel Variations. has been called "one of the most rewarding Brahms recitals currently available." Sony Classical released a 5-CD boxed set of his Chopin recordings, including both concerti. the Etudes, Op. 12 and Op. 25, the Ballades, the Preludes. Op. 28. and various shorterworks. Some of his previous solo recordings feature Bach's Partitas. Nos. I, 5. and 6. and Beethoven's Piano Sonatas. Op. 14.26, and 28. He is the recipient of two Grammy Awards. for his recordings of Chopin's complete Etudes and Bach's English Suites. Nos. I, 3, and 6, and numerous Grammy nominations. Mr. Perahia has also won several Gramophone Awards.Mr. Perahia is an honorary fellON of the Royal College of Music and the Royal Academy of Music. and he holds honorary doctorates from Leeds University and Duke University. In 2004. he was awarded an honorary KBE by Her Majesty The Queen. in recognition of his outstanding service to music.

10  Mariinsky Orchestra
The Mariinsky Orchestra and Valery Gergiev return for two performances of Russian orchestral masterpieces. Siberian pianist Denis Matsuev returns to Ann Arbor to join the orchestra for this performance. At this performance, Valery Gergiev and the Mariinsky Orchestra will also receive the 2015 UMS Distinguished Artist Award.
The Mariinsky Orchestra enjoys a long and distinguished history as one of the oldest musical institutions in Russia, Founded in the 18th century during the reignof Peter the Great and housed in St Petersburg's famed Mariinsky Theatre since1860, the Orchestra entered its "golden age" in the second half of the 19th century under the musical direction of Eduard Napravnik, whose leadership for more than a half century (1863-1916) secured its reputation as one of the finest in Europe, Numerous internationally famed musicians have conducted the Orchestra, among them Hans von BUlow, Felix Mottl, Felix Weingartner, Alexander von Zemlinsky, Otto Nikisch, Willem Mengelberg, Otto Klemperer, Bruno Walter, Erich Kleiber, Hector Berlioz, Richard Wagner, Gustav Mahler, and Arnold Schoenberg.Renamed the "Kirov" during the Soviet era, the Orchestra continued to maintain itshigh artistic standards under the leadership of Yevgeny Mravinsky and Yuri Temirkanov, The leadership of Valery Gergiev has enabled the Theatre to forge important relationships for the Ballet and Opera to appear in the world's greatest opera houses and theaters, among them the Metropolitan Opera, the Kennedy Center, the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden, the San Francisco Opera, the Theatre du Chatelet in Paris, the Salzburg Festival, and La Scala in Milan, The success of the Orchestra's frequent tours has created the reputation of what one journalist referred toas "the world's first global orchestra." Since its US debut in 1992, the orchestra has made 16 tours of North America, including a 2006 celebration of the complete Shostakovich symphonies, a Cycle of Stage Works of Prokofiev in 2008, major works of Hector Berlioz in February/March 2010, a Centennial Mahler Cycle in Carnegie Hall in October 2010, and in October 2011, the Mariinsky Orchestra opened Carnegie Hall's 120th season with a cycle of Tchaikovsky symphonies, which was also performed throughout the US and in Canada,Maestro Gergiev established the Mariinsky Label in 2009 and has since released over15 recordings including Shostakovich's Piano Concerto Nos, I and 2, Symphonies Nos. I and IS, Nos. 2 and 11, Nos, 3 and 10, and The Nose; Rachmaninoff's Piano Concerto No. 3 and Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini, Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture, Shchedrin's The Enchanted Wanderer and Piano Concerto No. 5, Stravinsky's Oedipus Rex and Les Noces, Wagner's Parsifal, Donizetti's Lucia di Lammermoor, and a DVD/Blu-ray of Tchaikovsky Symphonies Nos, 4, 5, and 6, and Balanchine's ballet Jewels, Their most recent 2012 recording release features Massenet's Don Quichotte,

11  Detroit Symphony Orc
A concert created to showcase Hill Auditorium’s organ, which was built in Detroit in 1893.
UMS and the Detroit Symphony Orchestra have partnered together for years, bringing many moving performances to UMS audiences. This latest partnership seeks to celebrate the 100th birthday of Hill Auditorium with a concert that features the Frieze Memorial Organ. The organ was built in Detroit in 1893 and displayed at the Chicago World’s Fair: Columbian Exposition, which celebrated the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the New World. Shortly thereafter, the University purchased the organ, and it was a centerpiece of Albert Kahn’s design when Hill Auditorium was built.
The internationally acclaimed DETROIT SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA (DSO), the fourth- oldest symphony orchestra in the US, is known for trailblazing performances. visionary maestros. collaborations with the world's foremost musical artists. and an unwavering commitment to Detroit. Esteemed conductor Leonard Slatkin. called America's Music Director" by the Los Angeles Times, became the 12th Music Director of the DSO during the 2008-09 season The DSO offers a performance schedule that includes Classical Pops. Jazz. Young People's. andNeighborhood concerts and festivals. The DSO makes its home in historic Orchestra Hall one of America's most acoustically perfect concert halls and actively pursues a mission to impact and serve the community through music.

12  New York Philharmoni
The New York Philharmonic performs three different concerts in Hill Auditorium during the U-M Homecoming Weekend as part of an extended five-year partnership. The programs will be drawn from the New York Philharmonic’s first two weeks of 2015-16 subscription concerts, as well as their opening night gala at Carnegie Hall.
The orchestra’s residency, which includes numerous educational and community engagement activities, closes with an unprecedented performance of Leonard Bernstein’s live score to the 1954 classic, On the Waterfront. The magnificent soundtrack for On the Waterfront was Leonard Bernstein’s only original movie score. The music churns with dramatic intensity, underscoring the brutality of the docks, the tough combativeness of the longshoremen, and the dark, looming presence of the mob bosses who dominate their territory. Written by Budd Schulberg and directed by Elia Kazan, the story is based on true events about crime and corruption on the waterfronts of Manhattan and Brooklyn, with Bernstein’s music accentuating the somber, yet triumphant, conclusion. Academy Award-nominated film composer and conductor David Newman leads the New York Philharmonic in this final concert of their 2015 residency.
Complete film screening with a live performance of the acclaimed score, the only movie score composed by Leonard Bernstein. The 1954 Elia Kazan film starring Marlon Brando won eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor, and Best Director.
Founded in 1842 the NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC is the oldest symphony orchestra in the US and one of the oldest in the world; on May 5. 2010 it performed its 150000th concert- a milestone unmatched by any other symphony orchestra in the world The Orchestra has always played a leading role in American musical life, championing the music of its time, and is renowned around the globe. having appeared in 431 cities in 63 countries - including its October 2009 debut in Vietnam and its February 2008 historic visit to Pyongyang DPRK earning the 2008 Common Ground Award for Cultural Diplomacy. The Philharmonic's concerts are broadcast on the weekly syndicated radio program The New York Philharmonic This Week. streamed on nyphil.org and have been telecast annually on Live From Lincoln Center on US public television since the series' premiere in 1976. The Philharmonic has made almost ZOOO recordings since 1917, with more than 500 currently available. The first major American orchestra to offer downloadable concerts recorded live, the Philharmonic released the first-ever classical iTunes Pass in 2009-10. and the self-produced recordings continue with Alan Gilbert and the New York Philharmonic: 2012-13 Season. The Orchestra has built on the long-running Young People's Concerts to develop a wide range of education programs. including the School Partnership Program. enriching music education in New York City, and Learning Overtures, fostering international exchange.Alan Gilbert became Music Director in September 2009, succeeding Lorin Maazel in a distinguished. line of 2Oth-century musical giants that goes back to Gustav Mahler and Arturo Toscanini. Credit Suisse is the New York Philharmonic's exclusive Global Sponsor.

13  Artemis Quartet
“Their performances overflow with fullness of sound, delineated structure, and unparalleled drama.” (Frankfurt) The Artemis Quartet made its UMS debut in 2013 with an interesting pairing of Bach and Piazzolla. Now the ensemble returns with a more conventional string quartet program that features works by Dvorák, Latvian composer Peteris Vasks, and Tchaikovsky. The Berlin-based ensemble was founded in 1989 and programs its own series at the Berlin Philharmonic. In 2011, it was named Quartet in Residence at the Vienna Konzerthaus.

14  Anne-Sophie Mutter,
With unparalleled distinction in the world of classical music, Anne-Sophie Mutter returns to UMS for her sixth appearance since her 1989 UMS May Festival debut with the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra. With an international career that began at age 13, when Herbert von Karajan invited her to perform with the Berlin Philharmonic, she also devotes time to numerous charity projects and supports the development of young, exceptionally talented musicians. Accompanied by her longtime recital partner, Lambert Orkis, she offers a performance that gives proof to her reputation as one of very best violin virtuosos in the world.
For more than 35 years, violinist ANNE-SOPHIE MUITER has sustained a career of exceptional musicianship with an unwavering commitment to the future of classical music. Since her international debut at the Lucerne Festival in 1976, followed by a solo appearance with Herbert von Karajan at the Salzburg Whitsun Concerts, Ms. Mutter has appeared in all the major concert halls of Europe, North and South America and Asia.In addition to performing and recording the established masterpieces of the violin repertoire, Ms. Mutter is an avid champion of 20th- and 21st-century violin repertoire in both orchestral and chamber music settings. Cited by The Chicago Tribune for doing more than “any living violinist to enrich the late20th-century violin repertory” Ms. Mutter has had new works composed for her by Sebastian Currier, Henri Dutilleux, Sofia Gubaidulina Witold Lutoslawskl Norbert Moret. Krzysztof Penderecki, Sir Andre Previn, and Wolfgang Rihm. She also devotes her time to numerous charity projects and supports the development of young. exceptionally talented musicians.In the year 2013 Anne-Sophie Mutter will perform in Asia Europe, and North America. The season's schedule solidifies the violinist's musical versatility and her unparalleled distinction in the world of classical music.
Anne-Sophie Mutter maintains her focus on bringing new works to concert halls. The world premiere of Sebastian Currier's Ringtone V ariations for violin and double bass, a work commissioned by her foundation. provides the prelude for a following Asian Tour with the Mutter Virtuosi.This ensemble, under the musical direction of the violinist herself, consists of 14 current and former scholarship students of the Anne-Sophie Mutter Foundation. Further highlights of the year include a concert in celebration of composer Witold Lutoslawski's lOOth birthday in Warsaw and a recital in Carnegie Hall on the 25th anniversary of Ms. Mutter's debut in the concert hallThe honors afforded Anne-Sophie Mutter for her many recordings include the Deutscher Schallplattenpreis, the Record Academy prize, the Grand Prix du Disque, the Internationaler Schallplattenpreis as well as several Grammys. On the occasion of the violinist's 35th stage anniversary in 2011, Deutsche Grammophon launched a comprehensive boxed set with all of the artist's DG recordings, extensive documentation and previously unpublished rarities.In 2008 Ms. Mutter established the Anne-Sophie Mutter Foundation whose objective is the further strengthening of the worldwide promotion of top young musical talents. In 2012, she was bestowed the Atlantic Council's distinguished artistic leadership award. She has been awarded the Brahms prize, the Erich-Fromm prize, and the Gustav- Adolf prize for her social involvement in 2011; and wide-ranging recognition including an honorary doctorate from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology in Trondheim. the St. Ulrich European peace prize, the Cristobal Gabarron arts award the International Ernst von Siemens music prize, and the Leipzig Mendelssohn music prize.

15  Bobby McFerrin
Matchless vocal improviser with a breathtaking vocal range, Bobby McFerrin returns with his latest project influenced by the spirituals his father sang. Expect soulfulness, poignancy, beauty, and joy.
Listening to Bobby McFerrin sing may be hazardous to your preconceptions; side effects may include unparalleled joy and a sudden, irreversible urge to lead a more spontaneous existence. Ten-time Grammy Award winner Bobby McFerrin will always be the guy who sang “Don’t Worry, Be Happy,” but his “greatest gift to audiences may be transforming a concert hall into a playground, a village center, a joyous space” (The Los Angeles Times). What Bobby McFerrin does is not an act; it’s spontaneous invention. Bobby’s legendary solo vocal performances have dazzled audiences all over the world and sent them home singing. With his new project, SpiritYouAll, Bobby pays homage to his father (the opera singer Robert McFerrin, Sr) and the generations of Americans who sang of our shared joy and pain through the songs commonly known as the Negro Spirituals.
For decades. BOBBY McFERRIN has broken all the rules. The 10-time Grammy Award winner has blurred the distinction between pop music and fine art. goofing around barefoot in the world's finest concert halls, exploring uncharted vocal territory. and inspiring a whole new generation of a cappello singers and the beatbox movement. His latest album. spirityouall is a bluesy, feel-good recording. an unexpected move from the music-industry rebel who singlehandedly redefined the role of the human voice with his a cappella hit "Don't Worry. Be Happy." his collaborations with Yo-Yo Ma, Chick Corea. and the Vienna Philharmonic, his improvising choir, Voicestra and his legendary solo vocal performances.It's been the quietest and most polite of revolutions. Mr. McFerrin was always an unlikely pop star. He created a lasting ear-worm of a #1 hit early in his career, then he calmly went back to pursuing his own iconoclastic musical journey, improvising on national television, singing melodies without words. spontaneously inventing parts for 60,000 choral singers in a stadium in Germany, ignoring boundaries of genre, all the while defying all expectations. Mr. McFerrin came from a family of singers: Bobby's father, the Metropolitan Opera baritone Robert McFerrin. Sr. provided the singing voice for Sydney Poitier for the film version of Porgy 6 Bess, and his mother Sara was a fine soprano soloist and voice teacher. Bobby McFerrin grew' up surrounded by music of all kinds. He remembers conducting Beethoven the stereo at three, hiding under the piano while his father and mother coached young singers. dancing around the house to Louie Armstrong. Judy Garland Etta Jones. and Fred Astaire. He played the clarinet seriously as a child but he began his musical career as a pianist at the age of 14. He led his own jazz groups. studied composition. toured with the show band for the Ice Follies,and played for dance classes. Then one day he was walking home and suddenly understood that he had been a singer all along.Mr. McFerrin's history as an instrumentalist and band leader is key to understanding his innovative approach to mapping harmony and rhythm (as well as melody) with his voice."I can't sing everything at once,· he says, "but 1can hint at it so the audience hears even what I don't sing: All that pioneer spirit and virtuosity has opened up new options for singers; so have Mr. McFerrin's experiments in multi-tracking his voice ("Don't Worry, Be Happy" has seven separate, over-dubbed vocal tracks; his choral album vocabularies [with Roger Treece] has thousands). But virtuosity isn't the point. "I try not to 'perform' onstage: says Bobby.”I try to sing the way I sing in my kitchen. because 1just can't help myself. 1want audiences to leave the theater and sing in their own kitchens the next morning. I want to bring audiences into the incredible feeling of joy and freedom I get when I sing.”

16  Alison Balsom
Experience one of the most distinctive and groundbreaking musicians on the international circuit today.
Firmly established as one of the world’s leading trumpeters, Alison Balsom makes her UMS debut with an evening of shockingly beautiful music. Born in 1978, Balsom was recently named “Female Arts of the Year” at the Classical BRITs for the second time, and in 2009 she headlined one of classical music’s most celebrated concerts – the last night of the BBC Proms, which reached its biggest ever global TV audience of an estimated 200 million.
Twice crowned “Female Artist of the Year" at the Classic BRITs, ALISON BALSOM has cemented an international reputation as one of classical music's great ambassadors and is ranked among the most distinctive and ground-breaking musicians on the international circuit today. Ms. Balsom has also been honored with numerous awards by Gramophone, ClassicFM, and ECHO Klassik.In 2009, Alison Balsom headlined one of classical music's most celebrated concerts - The Last Night of the BEC Proms - which reached its biggest ever global television audience of an estimated 200 million. In December 2010 Ms. Balsom went on to make her US television debut with the Orchestra of St Luke's on The Late Show with David Letterman - a platform few classical artists have gained access to.The 2011-12 season saw Ms. Balsom make return visits to China where she performed with Lorin Maazel and the National Symphony Orchestra and to the Los Angeles Philharmonic with whom she made her Hollywood Bowl debut. Other season highlights included concerts with the Toronto Symphony Orchestra Orchestra della Svizzera Italiana Chamber Orchestra of Philadelphia, and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra. In the current season, Ms. Balsom embarks on major international tours of Europe, China and the US with the Wiener Symphoniker, kammerorchesterbasel, Concerto Koln, Scottish Ensemble, and the Philharmonia Orchestra.Ms. Balsom's highly distinctive sound earned her much recognition in her early career when she primarily reached her audience through radio broadcasts under the auspices of the BBC Radio 3 New Generation Artists scheme.While represented by the Young ConcertArtistsTrust Ms. Balsom caught the ear of EMI Classics with whom she records exclusively . Her internationally celebrated Bach Trumpet and Organ recording of 2005 was quickly followed by Caprice which won her further critical acclaim. Her third album. featuring the great pillars of the trumpet repertoire, the concertos of Haydn and Hummel firmly established her as one of the world's leading trumpeters . Italian Concertos which is made up of Ms. Balsom's own arrangements of Italian BaroqueConcertos, became EMI Classics biggest selling album of 2010.In addition to transcribing and arranging existing works for her instrument Ms. Balsom is increasingly active in commissioning new works for trumpet. Her world-premiere performance of James MacMillan's Seraph at Wigmore Hall in 2011 went on to become the title track of her 2011 release for EMI Classics. Her latest album, Sound the Trumpet sees Ms. Balsom perform a variety of works by Purcell and Handel with Trevor Pinnock and The English Concert on period instruments.Alison Balsom studied trumpet at the Guildhall School of Music, the Paris Conservatoire, and with Hakan Hardenberger. She was a concerto finalist in the BBC Young Musician competition in 1998 and received the Feeling Musique Prize for quality of sound in the 2001 Maurice Andre International Trumpet Competition. She performs a wide range of recital and concerto repertoire, from Albinoni to Zimmermann and performs on both modern and baroque trumpets.

17  SITI: Trojan Women
SITI is committed to providing a place where the interaction of art, artists, audiences, and ideas inspire the possibility for change, optimism, and hope.
SITI Company, one of the country’s leading theater ensembles, brings one of the greatest of all anti-way dramas in this new production directed by Anne Bogart and adapted by Jocelyn Clarke. In the ruins of their burning city, the royal women of Troy—still mourning the slaughter of their husbands and sons—await enslavement and exile. The play is a timeless meditation on the moments of individual choice that separate death and life, despair and hope, future and past.
The Trojan Women is an ancient tragedy by the Greek playwright Euripides. It was first performed over 2,400 years ago during the Peloponesian War and is often considered a commentary on the barbaric behavior of the Athenians toward the women and children of the people they subjugated in war. It’s believed to be based on capture of the Aegean island of Melos and the subsequent slaughter and subjugation of its populace by the Athenians in 415 BCE, the same year in which the play was written.
Euripides' Trojan Women enjoys a history of generating shudders of recognition and empathy from audiences in all cultures and centuries since it was first performed in 415 BCE The success and longtime appeal of the play remains a mystery to scholars who insist that Trojan Women is imperfect because nothing happens in it.Playwright! adapter Jocelyn Clarke and I share a fascination with how great plays adjust and reshape to find renew-ed significance in the moment of their realization. In the past 40 years. productions of Trojan Women have incorporated contemporary issues such as Vietnam. Bosnia the Israeli/Palestinian conflict Iraq, European imperialism. the Holocaust, Hiroshima Northern Ireland and more. Productions have reflected the adapters' interests in existentialism, nihilism. ancient rites. Armageddon. shipwrecks. gender antagonism. and so forth. incorporating music, multi-media ancient languages. choreography, operatic singing. ritual and virtuosic acting.The play seems able to contain a multitude of interpretations with ease. In our approach to Trojan Women we are listening closely to the accumulated signals sent to us from the history of the play's shifting shapes. We hope to land lightly and with a certain relevant exactitude on the Power Center stage, sure-footed but in communion with the play's mysteries and revelations.
SITI COMPANY was built on the bedrock of ensemble. We believe that through the practice of collaboration. a group of artists working together over time can have a significant impact upon both contemporary theater and the world at large.Through our performances, educational programs. and collaborations with other artists and thinkers, SITI Company will continue to challenge the status quo. train to achieve artistic excellence in every aspect of our work, and offer new ways of seeing and of being as both artists and as global citizens.SITI Company is committed to providing a gymnasium-for-the-soul where the interaction of art, artists. audiences. and ideas inspire the possibility for change. optimism. and hope.Founded in 1992 by Anne Bogart and Tadashi Suzuki, SITI Company began as an agreement to redefine and revitalize contemporary theater in the US through an emphasis on international cultural exchange and collaboration. Originally envisioned as a summer institute in Saratoga Springs. New York. SITI expanded to encompass a year-round company based in New York City with a summer season in Saratoga The Company is known nationally and internationally as a top-level artistic collective that generates groundbreaking theater while also training artists from around the world.In addition to Artistic Director Anne Bogart. SITI Company is comprised of 10 actors, four designers. a playwright and an executive director. The company represents a change in thinking about the relationships between artists and institutions. SIT! Company has formed relationships with theaters and venues around the world who present the Company's work.

18  Audra McDonald
Audra McDonald has secured her place atop Broadway’s pantheon with a record-breaking six Tony Awards, the only actor ever to achieve the Tony Grand Slam: “Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play” (as Billie Holiday in Lady Day at Emerson’s Bar and Grill), “Best Featured Actress in a Musical” (Carousel and Ragtime), “Best Featured Actress in a Play” (Master Class and A Raisin in the Sun), and “Best Actress in a Musical” (The Gershwins’ Porgy and Bess). Blessed with a luminous soprano and an incomparable gift for storytelling, she is equally at home on Broadway and opera stages and in roles on film and television. After her stunning 2013 Gershwin concert, she returns to UMS for her sixth appearance, featuring music from her most recent recording, Go Back Home. “One of Ms. McDonald’s greatest gifts is to find the story inside the song and deliver it with immediacy and clarity…A defining voice of our time.”
AUDRA McDONALD is unparalleled in the breadth and versatility of her artistry as both singer and actress. With a record-tying five Tony A wards. two Grammy A wards. and a long list of other accolades to her name, she is among today's most highly regarded performers. Blessed with a luminous soprano and an incomparable gift for dramatic truth-telling. she is equally at home on Broadway and opera stages as in roles on film and television. In addition to her theatrical work, she maintains a major career as a concert and recording artist regularly appearing onthe great stages of the world. Born into a musical family, Ms. McDonald grew up in Fresno, California and received her classical vocal training at The Juilliard School. A year after graduating. she won her first Tony Award for Best Performance by a Featured Actress in a Musical" for Carousel at Lincoln Center Theater, directed by Nicholas Hytner.She also received Tony Awards for her performances in Terrence McNally's Master Class (1996) and Ahrens & Flaherty's Ragtime (1998). In 2004 she won her fourth Tony for A Raisin in the Sun, and in 2012 she won her fifth - and her first in the leading actress category - for The Gershwins' Porgy and Bess,placing her in the illustrious company of Broadway legends Julie Harris and Angela Lansbury as the only people in Tony history to win five performance awards Ms.McDonald's other theater credits include The Secret Garden (1993), Marie Christine (1999), Henry IV (2004), 110 in the Shade (2007\ and her Public Theater Shakespeare in the Park" debut in Twelfth Night alongside Anne Hathaway (2009).On the concert stage, McDonald has premiered music by Pulitzer Prize- winning composer John Adams and sung with virtually every major American orchestra including the Boston Symphony, Chicago Symphony, Cleveland Orchestra Los Angeles Philharmonic, National Symphony, New York Philharmonic, PhiladelphiaOrchestra andSan Francisco Symphony, and under such conductors as Sir Simon Rattle, Esa-Pekka Salonen. and Leonard Slatkin. In the fall of 2013, she embarks on a 22-city North American concert tour with appearances in San Francisco, Los Angeles. Chicago, Toronto, and Houston among others.As an exclusive Nonesuch recording artist Ms.McDonald's new album. Go Back Home, is her most personal recording to date, featuring songs by Stephen

19  Andras Schiff, piano
After his stunning performance of Bach’s Goldberg Variations and Beethoven’s Diabelli Variations two seasons ago, Sir András Schiff returns with a project called “The Last Sonatas.”
Performed over the course of a week, this mini-festival includes the final three sonatas of Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, and Schubert.
ANDRAS SCHIFF is renowned and acclaimed as a pianist conductor, pedagogue, and lecturer. Born in Budapest Hungary in 1953, Mr. Schiff started piano lessons at age five with Elisabeth Vadasz. He continued his musical studies at the Ferenc Liszt Academy with Professor Pal Kadosa Gyorgy Kurtag. and Ferenc Rados, and in London with George Malcolm. Indisputably one of the most prominent proponents of the keyboard works of 1. S. Bach. Mr. Schiff has long proclaimed that Bach stands at the core of his music making. Through November 2013. Andras Schiff will continue his two- season endeavor, The Bach Project when it returns to North America comprising six Bach recitals and a week of the orchestral music of Bach, Schumann. and Mendelssohn with Mr.Schiff at the piano and on the podium. Repertoire this season will be the Complete Partitas and Goldberg Variations. Mr. Schiff’s recitals in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Boston, Toronto, Ann Arbor, and New York include Beethoven's Diabelli Variations following the Goldberg Variations. He will play this monumental program in London's Wigmore Hall to celebrate his 60th birthday.Mr. Schiff has established a prolific discography, and since 1997 has been an exclusive artist for ECM New Series and its producer, Manfred Eicher. Recordings for ECM include the complete solo piano music of Beethoven and Janacek, two solo albums of Schumann piano pieces, his second recordings of the Bach Partitas and Goldberg Variations , The Well Tempered Clavier, Books I and II and now Beethoven's Diabelli Variations recorded on two instruments: The Bechstein from 1921 and an original forte piano from Vienna 1820 - the place and time of the composition.Andras Schiff has worked with the major international orchestras and conductors, but now performs mainly as conductor and soloist. In 1999 he created his own chamber orchestra the Cappella Andrea Barca which consists of international soloists, chamber musicians, and friends. He also works every year with the Philharmonia Orchestra and Chamber Orchestra of Europe. From 2004-2007 he was Artist-in-Residence of Kunstfest Weimar. In 2007-2008 he was Pianist-in- Residence of the Berlin Philharmonic.In spring 2011, Mr. Schiff attracted attention because of his opposition to the Hungarian media law, and, in view of the ensuing attacks on him from some Hungarian nationalists, has made the decision not to perform or return to his home country.Andras Schiff is an Honorary Professor of the Music Schools in Budapest Detmold and Munich, and a Special Supernumerary Fellow of Balliol College (Oxford UK).

20  Apollo's Fire
Fresh from their 2014 performance of Monteverdi’s Vespers, Apollo’s Fire & Singers returns to St. Francis of Assisi Church with one of their signature pieces, Bach’s St. John Passion. Bursting out of the gate from the agitated opening chorus, this work is considered Bach’s most dramatic and theatrical oratorio. In this acclaimed interpretation, the story’s action is highlighted by a dramatic approach: the roles are performed by true singing actors, staged on a special theatrical platform within the orchestra. The acclaimed Apollo’s Singers evoke the wild mob with fierce intensity.
Named for the classical god of music and the sun APOLLO'S FIRE was founded in 1992 by the award-winning young harpsichordist and conductor Jeannette Sorrell. Ms. Sorrell envisioned an ensemble dedicated to the baroque ideal that music should evoke the various “Affekts” or passions. in the listeners. Apollo's Fire is a collection of creative artists who share Sorrell's passion for drama and rhetoric.
Hailed as one of the pre-eminent period-instrument ensembles, Apollo's Fire made its London debut in 2010 in a sold-out concert at Wigmore Hall with BBC broadcast. Apollo's Fire returned to Europe in fall 2011, as part of a major international tour with French countertenor Philippe Jaroussky. The ensemble was met with standing ovations in Madrid (Royal Theatre), Bordeaux (Grand Theatre de l’Opera), Lisbon. Metz. Boston. Ann Arbor, Toronto, Los Angeles, and San Francisco.
Apollo's Fire has also toured throughout North America appearing at the Aspen Music Festival the Boston Early Music Festival series, the library of Congress. the Tropical Baroque Festival in Miami. and the Ojai International Festival in California. In 2010 the ensemble performed the Monteverdi Vespers in an ll-concert national tour.At home in Cleveland Apollo's Fire enjoys sold-out performances at its subscription series, which has drawn national attention for creative programming. Upcoming US projects next season include tours of the Monteverdi Vespers and of Sorrell’s acclaimed crossover program “Sacrum Mysterium - A Celtic Christmas Vespers” Apollo's Fire has released 20 commercial CDs, and currently records for theBritish label Avie. Since the ensemble's introduction into the European CD market in 2010, the recordings have won rave reviews in the London press:Na swaggering version, brilliantly played" and the Midwest's best-kept musical secret is finally reaching British ears. Four of the ensemble's CD releases have become best-sellers on the classical Billboard chart: The Monteverdi Vespers, Bach's Brandenburg Concertos, and Jeannette Sorrell's two crossover programs. Come to the River andSacrum Mysterium: A Celtic Christmas Vespers.

21  Joshua Bell, violin
Often referred to as a “poet of the violin,” Joshua Bell enchants audiences with his breathtaking virtuosity, sheer beauty, and charismatic stage presence. His restless curiosity, passion, universal appeal, and multi-faceted musical interests have been developed from age four, when his parents noticed him plucking tunes with rubber bands that he had stretched around the handles of his dresser drawers. His first US tour as music director of the Academy of St. Martin in the Fields, which included the 2012 Ford Honors Program in Ann Arbor, resulted in rock concert enthusiasm from audiences. He returns now to perform a Valentine’s weekend recital.
Superstar violinist Joshua Bell attacks the stunning Beethoven Concerto with his breathtaking virtuosity and sumptuous tone and leads the rest of the program from the concertmaster’s chair.
An Avery Fisher Prize recipient Mr. Bell received the New York Recording Academy Honors in June 2013. Recently appointed Music Director of the Academy of St. Martin-in- the-Fields. Mr. Bell is the first person to hold this title since Sir Neville Marriner formed the orchestra in 1958. Their first recording under Mr. Bell's leadership of Beethoven's Symphony Nos. 4 and 7 from Sony Classical debuted in February 2013 at No. 1 on the Billboard Classical chart and they will next record the Bach violin concertos.Last fall Mr. Bell performed a South American recital tour with pianist Alessio Bax and a European tour with the Academy of St. Martin-in-the-Fields. Mr. Bell also guests with the Houston. Dallas. and St. Louis symphonies.In 2014. he reunites with his beloved Academy of St. Martin-in-the-Fields, directing Beethoven's Symphony Nos. 3 and 5. He will also perform the Brahms concerto with the Vienna Philharmonic under the baton of Paavo Jarvi. and the Sibelius with Gustavo Dudamel conducting the Los Angeles Philharmonic. The current US recital tour with Sam Haywood. a perfonnance at the Kennedy Center with the National Symphony Orchestra and dates with the Los Angeles Philharmonic round out the seasonIn 2007, Joshua Bell performed incognito in a Washington. DC subway station for a Washington Post story examining art and context. The story earned writer Gene Weingarten a Pulitzer Prize and sparked an international firestorm of discussion The conversation continues to this day, thanks in part to the September 2013 publication of the illustrated children's book. The Man With the Violin by Kathy Stinson. illustrated by Dusan Petricic from Annick Press.Mr. Bell has recorded more than 40 CDs garnering Mercury, Grammy, Gramophone, and Echo Klassik awards. His first holiday CD, released last fall and entitled Musical Gifts From Joshua Bell and Friends features collaborations with artists including Chris Botti, Kristin Chenoweth, Chick Corea Gloria Estefan. Renee Fleming. Placido Domingo, and Alison Krauss. Recent releases include French Impressions with pianist Jeremy Denk, the eclectic At Home With Friends, the Defiance soundtrack, Vivaldi's The Four Seasons, Tchaikovsky's Violin Concerto with the Berlin Philharmonic, The Red Violin Concerto, Voice of the Violin, and Romance of the Violin, which Billboard named the 2004 “Classical CD of the Year,” and Mr. Bell the “Classical Artist of the Year.” His discography encompasses critically acclaimed performances of the major violin repertoire in addition to John Corigliano's Oscar-winning soundtrack, The Red Violin.
Born in Bloomington. Indiana Mr. Bell received his first violin at age four and at 12 began studying with Josef Gingold at Indiana University. Two years later he came to national attention in his debut with Riccardo Muti and the Philadelphia Orchestra and, at 17, debuted at Carnegie Hall. Mr. Bell's career has now spanned over 30 years as a soloist, chamber musician. recording artist, and conductor.Joshua Bell performs on the 1713 Huberman Stradivarius.

22  St Petersburg Philha
The St. Petersburg Philharmonic returns to Ann Arbor, bringing along the young pianist Denis Kozhukhin, who makes his UMS debut. Kozhukhin’s “nimble, flying virtuosity is a mix of weightless, supple, acrobatic display and power with a steel core…spectacularly mind-boggling.” (The Herald Scotland) The program also features the Georgian composer Giya Kancheli’s …al niente, which was dedicated to Yuri Temirkanov.
The ST. PETERSBURG PHILHARMONIC ORCHESTRA traces its history from 1882, when it was founded on the Order of Alexander III, as the Court Musicians' Choir. A tthe beginning of the 20th century, the choir gave the Russian premieres of the symphonic poems Ein Heldenleben and Also Sprach Zarathustra by Richard Strauss. Mahler's Symphony No. 1 and Bruckner's Symphony No. g, Scriabin's Poem of Ecstasy , and Stravinsky's Symphony No.1 . In those years, the orchestra was conducted by Maestros Nikisch. Strauss. Glazunov, and Kussevitsky.In 1921. the Orchestra had at its disposal the former Nobility Assembly Hall and thus the country's first philharmonic was opened. Conductors included Maestros Walter, Weingartner, Abendroth. Fried Kleiber, Monteux. and Klemperer as well as orchestral soloists Vladimir Horowitz. Jascha Heifetz; Dmitri Shostakovich and Sergei Prokofiev also performed with the orchestra. In 1918, the orchestra presented the premiere of Prokofiev's Classical Symphony and in 1926 - the First Symphony by Shostakovich.In 1934, the Orchestra - the first in the country - was awarded the title Honored Orchestra of the Republic. 1938 began what is referred to as the “Age of Mravinsky" - years of hard work earned the Orchestra a place amongst the most prominent ensembles in the world. Since 1946, which marked the Orchestra's first historical trip abroad the Orchestra has regularly toured internationally.Since 1988, Yuri Ternirkanov has led the Orchestra Recently, the Orchestra has been ranked among the top 20 orchestras in the world (according to Gramophone) and has toured throughout Europe, Asia and America. It has made appearances at the world's most prestigious music festivals.At the Grand Hall the Orchestra continues to introduce audiences to orchestral premieres including works by Penderecki, Nono, Tishchenko, Slonimsky, Segerstam, Obukhov, Korngold Rota and Desyatnikov.

23  Israel Philharmonic
The Israel Philharmonic, along with their “Music Director for Life”, Zubin Mehta, returns to Ann Arbor for the first time in a decade. Founded in 1936 by Bronislaw Huberman, the IPO’s inaugural concert was conducted by Arturo Toscanini. For more than 75 years, the orchestra has hosted the world’s greatest conductors and soloists while developing Israeli artists and young talents from both Israel and abroad. Born in Bombay, Zubin Mehta has had a longstanding affiliation with the orchestra dating back more than 40 years. He has also served as music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic and the New York Philharmonic, and counts among his many accolades a star on Hollywood Boulevard.
The Israel Philharmonic Orchestra (IPO) is one of Israel's oldest and most influential cultural institutions. Since its founding in 1936, the IPO has dedicated itself to presenting the world's greatest music to audiences in Israel and around the world Founded by Polis h violinist Bronislaw Huberman, the IPO represents the fulfillment of his dream "to unite the desire of the country for an orchestra with the desire of the Jewish musicians for a country: Its inaugural concert was conducted by Arturo Toscanini who felt his participation was a means to demonstrate his opposition to fascism. Members traveled in armored cars to play in a besieged Jerusalem during the War of Independence, and among Israelis. the memory of IPO Laureate Conductor Leonard Bernstein conducting the Orchestra after the battle for Beersheba is an historic moment.Under the esteemed leadership of Zubin Mehta Music Director for We, the IPO travels extensively throughout the world acting as Israel's premiere cultural ambassador.The goodwill created by these tours, which have included historic visits to Japan, Argentina, Poland, Hungary, Russia China and India is of enormous value to the state of Israel. In 2005 the Orchestra traveled to Berlin to commemorate 40 years of diplomatic relations between Israel and Germany. In April 2013, Maestro Mehta led the IPO with violinist Julian Rachlin in a tribute concert at Poland's National Opera, commemorating the 70th anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising.Joined by Zubin Mehta and Gianandrea Noseda Principal Guest Conductor of the Orchestra the IPO travels to 14 cities across the US this season.Through the efforts of the American Friends of the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra and generous support of donors worldwide, the lPO returned to its home at Tel AviVs Heichal Hatarbut following extensive renovations. The Mann Auditorium was renamed the Charles Bronfman Auditorium and hosted its inaugural gala on May 25, 2013.The IPO has released over 40 live recordings on the Helicon. Sony, Deutsche Grammophon. EML Philips. and Teldec labels. The Orchestra gives over 100 performances each year in Israel to their 26,000 subscribers in Tel Aviv, Jerusalem. and Haifa.

24  Akademie fur Alte Mu
The Akademie für Alte Musik Berlin began as a courageous display of musical sovereignty against the East German socialist regime and now, some 30 years later, enjoys recognition as one of Europe’s greatest musical success stories. “Akademie für Alte Musik Berlin is early music’s Bang on a Can All Stars…staggeringly good players.” Their UMS debut program features music by J.S. Bach and two of his sons.
Founded in Berlin in 1982 and recognized today as one of the world's leading chamber orchestras. the AKADEMIE FUR ALTE MUSIK BERLIN, or Akamus, enjoys an unprecedented history of success. The ensemble, which performs regularly in Europe's leading musical centers. has toured throughout Asia North America and South America.Ever since the reopening of the Berlin Konzerthaus in 1984, the ensemble has enjoyed its own concert series in Germany's capitaL and. since 1994, has been a regular guest at the Berlin Staatsoper Unter den Linden and at the Innsbruck Festival of Early Music. In the 2012-13 season. Akamus started a concert series at Munich's Prinzregententheater. Each year, Akamus performs approximately 100 concerts. ranging from small chamber works to large-scale symphonic pieces. and performs under the artistic leadership of its concertmasters Midori Seiler, Stephan Mai. Bernhard Forck. and Georg Kallweit as well as with numerous guest conductors and soloists. For over 25 years, their partnership with Belgian countertenor and conductor Rene Jacobs has produced many celebrated opera and oratorio productions.
The ensemble has also worked with conductors Marcus Creed Peter Dijkstra Daniel Reuss, and Hans-Christoph Rademann who currently leads the RIAS Kammerchor, as well as with Andreas Scholl Sandrine Piau. and Bejun Mehta. Moreover, Akamus has extended its artistic boundaries to work together with the modern dance company Sasha Waltz & Henry Purcell's Dido and Aeneas and Medea (music by Pascal Dusapin). With its visually dramatic performance of 4 Elements - 4 Seasons, a Nstaged concert." Akamus has demonstrated yet again its international reputation for being a creative and innovative ensemble.The international success of the Akademie fur Alte Musik Berlin is highlighted by well over one million recordings sold to the public. Recording exclusively for harmonia mundi France since 1994, the ensemble's CDs have earned many international prizes, including the Grammy Award, the Diapason d'Or, the Cannes Classical Award the Gramophone Award and the Edison Award. For its DVD production of Purcell's opera Dido and Aeneas with Sasha Waltz & Guests. Akamus received the German Record Critics' Award in 2009. For its recording of Telemann's Brockespassion. the ensemble was awarded the MIDEM Classical A ward 2010 and the Choc de I'Annee. In 2011, the recording of Mozart’s The Magic Flute was honored with the German Record Critics' Award. The CD Friedrich der Grosse: Music from the Berlin Court was awarded the Diapason d’Or in 2012 The orchestra's recording of Handel's opera Agrippina was nominated for a 2013 Grammy Award as “Best Opera Recording.” New CD releases in 2013 under Rene Jacobs' musical direction have included the world premiere recording of Pergolesi's oratorio Septem Verba a Christo, the acclaimed new interpretation of J.S. Bach's St. Matthew Passion. and Bejun Mehta's latest recital Ole Puro Ciel - The Rise of Classical Opera. The latest addition to the orchestra's discography is a CD devoted to Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, released to celebrate the 300th anniversary of the composer's birth and includes his fascinating Magnificat.

25  Olga Kern, piano
Olga Kern was the 2001 Van Cliburn winner and will perform a program of Schumann, Chopin, and Rachmaninoff. We are delighted to be able to bring Ms. Kern to Ann Arbor. Ms Kern is giving two sold-out concerts to inaugurate the Van Cliburn Foundation’s new concert hall this week in Fort Worth. She will also perform in recital at New York’s 92nd Street Y in early February.
Olga Kern, based in Moscow, has brought to stages around the world some of the mix of charisma and power cultivated by pianists of the old Russian school. Born in 1975, Kern had a musical ancestry that her family traced back to the circles of Rachmaninov and Tchaikovsky. Both her parents were musicians, and after hearing her mother play Chopin, she took up the piano herself at the age of 5. Glamorous and naturally gifted when it came to projecting stage presence, Kern showed a knack for winning competitions. She won her first one at 11 with a performance of Mendelssohn's music, and she decided on a musical career when she stepped in front of an audience as piano soloist with an orchestra: "When I stepped on the stage, I felt so great," she told The Charlotte Observer. "I understood at that moment that I will never change professions....This is how it must be. I must be performing." Kern's teachers in Moscow included Evgeny Timakin at the Moscow Central School and Sergei Dorensky at the Moscow Tchaikovsky Conservatory. By the time she was 17, she was being sent abroad for competitions, and she eventually took home first prize at 11 of them, helped along the way by an honorary scholarship from Russian President Boris Yeltsin in 1996. The jewel in Kern's competition crown came in 2001 at the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition in Fort Worth, TX, where she shared first prize with Stanislav Ioudenitch and thus became the first woman in the nearly 40-year history of the event to take the top prize. She performed Liszt's Don Juan Fantasy, impressing judges with her sheer power and flair, and she launched her recording career on the Harmonia Mundi label with a fresh reading of the same work. Kern is noted for the real finger-busters of the keyboard repertory -- Rachmaninov, Liszt, and a range of lesser-known virtuoso Russian works. Her Cliburn victory launched her on a series of U.S. tours, and she made her Carnegie Hall debut in 2004, after a cancellation by another pianist freed up the hall. Kern seized the moment and earned rave reviews. She has also concertized extensively in her native Russia, in Europe, and in East Asia. Noted for her stamina, Kern has averaged some 150 concerts a year in the most demanding repertory the classical tradition has to offer. In February 2005 in South Africa, she performed all four Rachmaninov piano concertos and the Rhapsody on a Theme by Paganini three times over a span of six days, likely an unprecedented feat. A single mother, Kern often leaves her young son in the care of her parents in Moscow; he has begun piano lessons at the Moscow Central School.

26  Kremerata Baltica
Born in Latvia, violinist Gidon Kremer has had an unconventional career, beginning studies with violin master David Oistrakh at the age of 18 and going on to win first prize in both the Paganini and Tchaikovsky International Competitions. With an unusually extensive repertoire, he regularly champions the work of living composers and has performed many important new compositions. He returns to UMS with his chamber ensemble Kremerata Baltica to perform a program that commemorates, in part, the centennial of Benjamin Britten’s birth.
In 1997. Austria's legendary Lockenhaus chamber music festival was witness to a small revolution, when the violinist Gidon Kremer presented a brand new orchestra: KREMERATA BALTICA. comprising 23 young players from Latvia Lithuania and Estonia conquered the discerning audience, injecting new blood into the festival with their exuberance, energy, and joy in playing. Kremerata Baltica an educational project with a long-term vision, was Kremer's 50th birthday present to himself: a way of passing on his wisdom to young colleagues from the Baltic states while making no compromises on artistic standards as he nurtured and inspired musical life in the region. The talented group of musicians developed in few years into one of the best international chamber orchestras in the world and has cemented its international reputation in major concert venues around the world.In the last 15 years. Kremerata Baltica has played in more than SO countries, performing in 600 cities, and given more than 1000 concerts in the world. It has released more than 20 CDs, won a Grammy Award in 2002. won the ECHO Prize in2002. and the Praemium Imperiale Grant for Young Artists in 2009. The orchestra is supported by the governments of the three Baltic states from which all of the orchestra's musicians originate: Latvia Lithuania and EstoniaAmong the celebrated soloists with whom Kremerata Baltica has played are soprano Jessye Norman; pianists Mikhail Pletnev, Yevgeny Kissin. and Oleg Maisenberg; violinists Thomas Zehetmair and Vadim Repin; and cellists Boris Pergamenshikov, Yo-Yo Ma and Mischa Maisky. Conductors have included Sir Simon Rattle, Esa-Pekka Salonen, Christoph Eschenbach, Kent Nagano, Heinz Holliger, and Vladimir Ashkenazy . Each of these musicians have contributed to shaping the chamber orchestra. Essential to Kremerata Baltica's artistic personality is its creative approach to programming. which often looks beyond the mainstream and has given rise to numerous world premieres of works by composers such as Part Kanchell Vasks, Desyatnikov,and Raskatov.The orchestra is prominently represented on a new ECM CD dedicated to Sofia Gubaidulina entitled The Canticle of the Sun, and on Nonesuch's box-set release of Gidon Kremer's complete Astor Piazzolla recordings, released in October 2013 . Kremerata Baltica has its own festival in Sigula Latvia and will celebrate the festival's 10th anniversary next summer as one of the core values of Latvian classical music life today.

27  Tara Erraught, mezzo
Her career was launched with an unexpected debut, replacing an ailing colleague and scoring great acclaim as Romeo in Bellini’s I Capuleti e i Montecchi at Bavarian State Opera. The rest is history. Just a few months ago, 26-year-old Tara Erraught’s Vienna State Opera debut left critics positively elated and audiences stunned. UMS brings this Irish-born mezzo-soprano to Hill Auditorium for her area debut, which will include works by Brahms, Dvorák, Fauré, R. Strauss, and Rossini.
Few emerging artists have captured the attention of the international opera public as the Irish-born mezzo-soprano TARA ERRAUGHT. A member of the Bayerische Staatsoper, she won widespread acclaim in February 2011, first in the title role of a new production of Ravel's L'Enfant et les Sortileges and in the same month, jumping in for an ailing colleague on five days' notice to perform Romeo in a new production of Bellini's I Capuleti e i Montecchi. The latter catapulted Ms. Erraught to world-wideacclaim. Ms. Erraught's 2013-14 season includes a world premiere. three role debuts, and a second US recital tour, amongst other engagements. Upcoming appearances during the second half of the season include her role debut as Sesto in Mozart's La Clemenzo by a reprisal of her acclaimed role as Angelina in Rossini's La Cenerentola, both with the Bayerische Staatsoper in Munich She makes a four-city recital tour in the US including Los Angeles' The Broad Stage, Ann Arbor's UMS, Clayton State University's Recital Series. and the Savannah Music Festival. Ms. Erraught makes her UK recital debut at London's Wigmore Hall in April. followed by her role debut as Octavian in Der Rosenkavalier at Glyndebourne. Fall 2013 performances included creating the role of Kitty in the world premiere of lain Bell's A Harlot's Progress at Theater an der Wien to acclaim. She also reprised her role as Hansel in Humperdinck's Hansel und Gretel with Bayerische Staatsoper. Future performances include Ms. Erraught's debut at the BBC Proms, her debut with the Philharmonia Orchestra and her stage debut at the Washington National Opera.
In 2013, Ms. Erraught was honored by the Bavarian government which bestowed upon her the prestigious Pro meritis scientiae et litterarum. in recognition for outstanding contribution to the arts. She is only the fifth musician. and the youngest recipient. to receive this honor since the annual awards inception in 2000.A native of Dundalk, Ireland Ms. Erraught graduated from the Royal Irish Academy of Music in Dublin and has been a member of the opera studio at the Bayerische Staatsoper in Munich since 2008. Ms. Erraught continues her studies in Dublin with acclaimed Royal Opera soprano Veronica Dunne, who has been the guiding force in her musical career. In Munich, where she makes her home, she has the privilege to work with famed German mezzo-soprano Brigitta Fassbaender on her current repertoire

28  Denis Matsuev, piano
Anyone who attended last season’s concert by the Mariinsky Orchestra came away talking about one thing: the astonishing piano soloist Denis Matsuev, whose extraordinary performance of Rachmaninoff’s Third Piano Concerto had the audience buzzing in the lobby at intermission, immediately after the performance, and for weeks beyond the concert hall. UMS immediately pursued a date for a solo recital and is pleased to deliver what is sure to be one of the most talked-about events of the season. “[The] Russian pianist Denis Matsuev brought …legendary Herculean strength and terrifying technique that Rachmaninoff and his famous octave-and-a-half hand span was said to have embodied. Matsuev was up to the task. Not only did he throw down thunderous octaves and navigate flurries of notes and trills, he had the endurance to consider the greater picture of the work at all times…It was a performance of formidable dexterity and structural clarity.” (Pittsburgh)
Since winning First Prize at the XI International Tchaikovsky Competition in 1998, Denis Matsuev has appeared in hundreds ofrecitals at the most prestigious and legendary concert halls throughout the world. Mr. Matsuev has also been awarded the State Prize of Russian Federation in Literature and Arts in 2009 and the Dmitry Shostakovich Prize in Music in 2010.Mr. Matsuev collaborates with the world's best known orchestras, such as the New York Philharmonic, Chicago Symphony, Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra, London Symphony, London Philharmonic, Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, Bavarian Radio Symphony, National Symphony, Pittsburgh Symphony, WDR Symphony Cologne, BBC Symphony, Philharmonia orchestra of London, Verbier Festival Orchestra, Filarmonica della Scala, Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia, Orchestre National,de France, Orchestre de Paris, Orchestre Philharmonique de Radio France, and Orchestre National du Capitole de Toulouse. He regularly appears with the most prominent conductors on the stage today, including Lorin Maazel, Valery Gergiev, Zubin Mehta, Mariss Jansons, Yuri Temirkanov, Kurt Masur, Paavo Jarvi, Leonard Slatkin, Myung-Whun Chung, Antonio Pappano, Semyon Bychkov, Ivan Fischer, Adam Fisher, Gianandrea Noseda, Jukka-Pekka Saraste, James Conlon, Mikhail Pletnev, Vladimir Fedoseyev, Vladimir Spivakov, and Tugan Sokhiev. Mr. Matsuev is a frequent guest of renowned musical festivals such as the Ravinia Festival and the Hollywood Bowl in the US, BBC Proms and Edinburgh International Festival in Great Britain, Schleswig-Holstein, Rheingau, Festspielhaus Baden-Baden in Germany, Chopin Festival in Poland, Maggio Musicale Fiorentino in Italy, Les Choregies d'Orange and Festival de la Rogue d'Antheron in France, Verbier and Montreux Festivals in Switzerland, Enescu Festival in Romania, Budapest Spring Festival in Hungary, and Stars of the White Nights Festival in Russia. Denis Matsuev's debut recital at Carnegie Hall in November 2007 was recorded live by Sony BMG and released as Denis Matsuev — The Concert at Carnegie Hall. The New York Times praised his performance, "...his poetic instincts held fast in tender moments, with trills as thrillingly precise as one might ever hope to hear."In December 2007, Alexander Rachmaninoff, grandson of Sergei Rachmaninoff, chose Mr. Matsuev to perform and record unknown pieces on the composer's own piano at the Rachmaninoff house "Villa Senar" in Lucerne. Subsequently, Sony BMG released Unknown Rachmaninoff, which has received strong positive reviews praising Mr. Matsuev's execution and creativity. In October 2008, at the personal invitation of Alexander Rachmaninoff, Mr. Matsuev was named Artistic Director of the Sergei Rachmaninoff Foundation. Mr. Matsuev is the Artistic Director of Annecy Classics Festival in France, Stars on Baikal Musical Festival in Irkutsk, Siberia, and the internationally recognized Crescendo Festival. Mr. Matsuev is the president of the charitable foundation New Names that supports music education for children in regions of his native Russia.

29  Handel's Radamisto
A concert opera featuring Handel’s Radamisto with countertenor David Daniels in the title role.
For his first opera at the Royal Academy, Handel chose an imposing subject: desire, dictatorship, and personal infatuation at the court of the Armenian King Tiridate. After its first airing in London in 1720, Radamisto was described by a critic as “more solid, ingenious, and full of fire than any drama which Handel had yet produced in this country.” But there’s intense subtlety and humanity in Radamisto, too, in the delicate poise of its very personal and artful arias and ensembles. Baroque aficionado Harry Bicket assembles an all-star cast to join the musicians of the English Concert for this rare performance of Handel’s exquisite opera.
In UMS’s early history, the concert opera was a standard feature on many UMS seasons. We’re delighted to present this concert version of Radamisto featuring U-M alumnus David Daniels, who has led the resurgence of interest in countertenors over the past two decades. “To say he is the most acclaimed countertenor of the day, perhaps the best ever, is to understate his achievement. He is simply a great singer.”
THE ENGLISH CONCERT is among the finest chamber orchestras in the world. with an unsurpassed reputation for inspiring performances of Baroque and Classical music. Created by Trevor Pinnock of Baroque music for trumpet with Alison Balsom and The English Concert directed by Trevor Pinnock in 1973. the orchestra appointed HarryBicket as its artistic director in 2007 and has since toured with him to Europe. the us. the Middle East, and Far East. Maestro Bickel: is renowned for his work with singers. and English Concert vocal collaborators in recent seasons have included Mark Padmore, Ian Bostridge, Vesselina Kasarova. Lucy Crowe. Elizabeth Watts. Daniele de Niese, Rosemary Joshua and Sarah Connolly.Recent highlights include European and US tours with Alice Coote Sara Mingardo. Anna Caterina Antonacci and Andreas Scholl; Artist-in-Association at the 2011 Spitalfields Summer Music Festival: residencies at the Victoria and Albert and Handel House museums in London. and The English Concert Master Class for young harpsichordist- directors in London.The English Concert and Choir toured Handel's Messiah in Spain in 2010. featuring a TV broadcast from the Palau de la Musica Barcelona. In 2011 they returned to the us. visiting LosAngeles, Chicago. Boston Toronto. and New York with Andreas Scholl. In 2013. the orchestra will present three Handel operas-in-concert in three successive seasons for Carnegie Hall New York and on tOOl" in the US and Europe. Harry Bickel: directed The English Concert and Choir in a televised performance of Bach's Mass in b minor at the 2012 Leipzig Bachfest and at the 2012 BOC Proms, and in August they appeared with David Daniels at the Edinburgh International FestivalThe English Concert's discography includes more than 100 recordings with Trevor Pinnock for Deutsche Grammophon Archiv, and a series of critically acclaimed CDs for Harmonia Mundi with violinist Andrew Manze. Recordings with Harry Bicket have been widely praised. including the recent release of Lucy Crane's debut solo recital n caro Sassane. In October. EMI Classics released Sound the Trumpet, a recording of Baroque music for trumpet with Alison Balsom and The English Concert directed by Trevor Pinnock.The English Concert works with several distinguished guest directors. including oboist Alfredo Bernardini. violinist Fabio Biondi and harpsichordists Laurence Cummings and Kenneth Weiss.

30  Milhaud's Oresteian
When Hill Auditorium was first built, UMS was the organization that oversaw the School of Music, a situation that held true until the early 1940s, when UMS transferred oversight of the School of Music to the University of Michigan. To commemorate 100 years of collaboration, we celebrate with a massive orchestral and choral work, Darius Milhaud’s Oresteian Trilogy, set for vocal soloists, chorus, orchestra, and a battery of percussion instruments. Based on the plays by Aeschylus and the only trilogy in Greek drama that has survived from antiquity, it relates the bloody chain of murder and revenge within the royal family of Argos. The work has rarely been performed in its entirety and, as with William Bolcom’s Songs of Innocence and of Experience in 2004, will be recorded for international release. The concert and recording feature ensembles from the University of Michigan School of Music, Theatre & Dance alongside the UMS Choral Union and a cast of soloists, all conducted by U-M’s Kenneth Kiesler.
They revealed Milhaud's setting of Claudel's French translation of Aeschylus' Oresteian tragedy, packed with powerful music and words, several roles for principal singers, and multiple choruses. There were also the somewhat unusual occurrences of rhythmically notated dramatic speaking, and the distribution of one role, the goddess Athena to a trio of singers. As the three hand-delivered scores constituted the three acts of just the final component in the trilogy, Les Eumenides, I could only guess at the magnitude of the entire piece.
L'Agamemnon's fairly customary turn-of-the-century orchestra is expanded in Les Choephores with the quite uncustomary supplement of 15 percussionists. Les Choephores requires substantial speaking parts for the chorus and the leader of the slave women. In Les Eumenides, Milhaud enriches the palate still further by adding two quartets: one of saxophones and one of saxhorns - 19th-century valved brass instruments once common in military bands but that almost never join an orchestra or accompany a choir.
The music is often as tightly woven and magnificently shaded as a tapestry. Musical threads of 3, 7, and 11 beats (or 4. 5, 3,and 9 beats) intertwine. The texture of this audible fabric is made expressive and variegated by weaving differently colored or “pitched" threads into mini or sub-tapestries that occur simultaneously in different keys. What at first sounds dissonant self-competing, and dense, over time becomes familiar language, much as a new dialect of jazz or “world music.” (Milhaud and Claudel had the transformative experience of a two-year visit to Brazil, where they researched and transcribed folk music.)
Milhaud’s trilogy after Aeschylus has. for me, reopened and broadened the rich realm of Greek mythology.The themes of passion and jealousy, violence and revenge, and prudence and propriety still resound within us and in our world. Topics of sexual and gender parity, family relationships. balance of power, and influence in a world of haves and have-nots. not to mention loyalty, steadfastness, allegiance, obedience to those in power, and the economic and social stratification of society - all continue to vex us and show how deeply our human nature connects us to our predecessors.They remind us how far - for all our progress - we still have to go.

31  Random Dance
“If any artist has defined the decade, it’s Wayne McGregor.” (The Times, London) Random Dance was founded in 1992 and became the instrument upon which McGregor evolved his drastically fast and articulate choreographic style. The company became a byword for its radical approach to new technology, incorporating animation, digital film, 3-D architecture, electronic sound, and virtual dancers into the live choreography. McGregor, an award-winning British dancemaker who serves as resident choreographer of The Royal Ballet, Covent Garden, is renowned for his physically taxing movement style and ground-breaking collaborations across dance, film, music, visual art, and science. Specifically, he researches the relationship between dance and the mind as artist-in-residence at the Department of Experimental Psychology at the University of Cambridge. Wayne McGregor is “doing some of the most exciting work in ballet on the planet.”

32  Hagen Quartet
“Their performance was filled with subtlety and wonder…the playing was breathtaking in its precision, dynamism, and agility…a thrilling encounter.” (The Independent) Regarded internationally as one of the foremost string quartets of the day, the Hagen Quartet consists of the two brothers Lukas (violin) and Clemens (cello) and their sister Veronika Hagen (viola), along with violinist Rainer Schmidt, who has been with the group for more than 20 years. For this return performance — they last appeared in Ann Arbor in 1998 — the Hagen Quartet presents a program of Beethoven quartets as part of UMS’s focus on musical renegades.
Praised for their unique, finely nuanced timbre and the engaging immediacy of their ensemble sound the HAGEN QUARTET was founded in 1981 by four Hagen siblings: violinists Lukas and Angelika (whose chair has been filled by Rainer Schmidt since 19B7), violist Veronika and cellist Clemens in Salzburg.Thirty-two years later, the Quartet has been celebrating its thirtieth anniversary with extensive touring of the first presentation of the complete cycle of Beethoven's string quartets in its history. From August 2012 through December 2013, the Quartet is performing this pinnacle of musical composition in the major music centers of the world, including Paris. London Vienna Salzburg, and Tokyo.Among other highlights of its 30th anniversary, in October 2011, the Hagen Quartet was recognized with the prestigious Echo Klassik Award for kEnsemble of the Year,"and in 2012, it was named Honorary Member of Vienna's Konzerthaus. The Quartet also released two acclaimed newer recordings to celebrate its anniversary, both on Myrios Classics: a disc of string quartets by Beethoven. Mozart and Webern; and a pairing of Grieg's String Quartet in g minor with Brahms's Clarinet Quintet, featuring clarinetist Jorg Widmann This past June, Myrios released an all-Beethoven disc representing the opposite ends of his quartet-composing career: Op. 18, Nos. 3 and 5 (1798-1800), and Op. 135 (1826).The Hagen Quartet's concert repertoire and discography embrace the history of the string quartet, from its pre-Haydn beginnings to Gyorgy Kurtag. The Hagen Quartet also works closely with composers of its own generation, whether by reviving existing works or by commissioning and premiering new pieces. Collaborations with other artists. such as Nikolaus Harnoncourt, Maurizio Pollini, Mitsuko Uchida Sabine Meyer, Krystian Zimerman and Heinrich Schiff, are also important to the Quartet. As teachers and mentors at the Salzburg Mozarteum and the Hochschule in Basel as well as in international master classes. the Quartet's members pass on their experience to younger colleagues.

33  Handel's Messiah
The holiday season in Ann Arbor is never officially underway until Handel’s Messiah is performed at Hill Auditorium. An Ann Arbor tradition, these performances are ultimately the heart and soul of UMS, connecting audiences not only with the talented people on stage but also with friends and family who attend each year. In a true community tradition, the performance features the Ann Arbor Symphony Orchestra, the 175 voices of the Grammy Award-winning UMS Choral Union (2006 Best Choral Performance), and conductor Jerry Blackstone.
George Frideric Handel's sacred oratorio Messiah is without question one of the most popular works in the choral / orchestral repertoire today. In what has become an indispensable Christmas tradition amateur and professional musicians in almost every city and town throughout the country perform this work as a seasonal entertainment and are rewarded with the satisfaction of taking part in one of the great communal musical events.The text for Messiah was selected and compiled from the Authorized (King James) Version of the Bible by Charles Jennens. an aristocrat and musician / poet of modest talent and exceptional ego. With Messiah. Jennens seems to have outdone himself in compiling a libretto with profound thematic coherence and an acute sensitivity to the inherent musical structure. With the finished libretto in his possession. Handel began setting it to music on August 22. 1741. and completed it 24 days later. He was certainly working at white-hot speed but this didn't necessarily indicate he was in the throes of devotional fervor, as legend has often stated. Handel composed many of his works in haste, and immediately after completing Messiah he wrote his next oratorio. Samson. in a similarly brief time-span.
Following the pattern of Italian baroque opera Messiah is divided into three parts. The first is concerned with prophecies of the Messiah's coming, drawing heavily from messianic texts in the Book of Isaiah, and concludes with an account of the Christmas story that mixes both Old and New Testament sources. The second part deals with Christ's mission and sacrifice, culminating in the grand "Hallelujah Chorus." The final shortest section is an extended hymn of thanksgiving. an expression of faith beginning with Job's statement “I know that my Redeemer liveth" and closing with the majestic chorus "Worthy is the Lamb" and a fugal Amen: In its focus on Christ's sacrifice Messiah resembles the great Lutheran Passions of Schiltz and Bad but with much less direct narrative and more meditative commentary on the redemptive nature of the Messiah's earthly mission. Handel scholar Robert Myers suggested that logically Handel's masterpiece should be called Redemption. for its author celebrates the idea of Redemption. rather than the personality of Christ:For the believer and non-believer alike, Handel's Messiah is undoubtedly a majestic musical edifice. But while a truly popular favorite around the world Messiah aspires to more than just a reputation as an enjoyable musical event. After an early performance of the work in London. Lord Kinnoul congratulated Handel on the “noble entertainment" he had recently brought to the city. Handel is said to have replied "My Lord I should be sorry if I only entertained them; I wished to make them better: Certainly Messiah carries an ennobling message to people of all faiths and credos. proclaiming peace on earth. and goodwill towards men" - a message that continues to be timely and universal.

34  Propeller: Twelfth N
Propeller returns after its much talked-about 2011 performances of Richard III and The Comedy of Errors with new productions of Twelfth Night and The Taming of the Shrew, two comedies full of mistaken identities, transformations, and deceptions that ultimately reveal truth.
In The Taming of the Shrew, a man playing a boy dresses up as a girl, which confuses Christopher Sly. In Twelfth Night, a man plays a girl disguised as a boy, which confuses everybody.
Both plays explore beautifully how being in love with the wrong person can reveal true feeling.
Propeller uses an all-male cast as was done in Shakespeare’s day. Mixing a rigorous approach to the text with a modern physical aesthetic, the company updates the productions in surprising ways, with actors also performing live music.
“As directed by Edward Hall, Propeller specializes in knuckle-duster Shakespeare that digs for the harshness beneath the lyricism. Funny, antic, bawdy: the productions are all these expected things. But they also make sure that the chuckles stick in your throat. The poetry may still be pretty; the comedy definitely is not.”

35  St Lawrence Quartet
One of the great finds of the 09/10 season was the St. Lawrence String Quartet, which made its UMS debut in a stellar program of Haydn, Ravel, and John Adams. Haydn returns to the program for this appearance, which is bookended with the composer’s quartets. In between, the ensemble performs a new work by Osvaldo Golijov, the Argentinean composer who has worked with the SLSQ since the early 1990s. The SLSQ appears twice with UMS in the 11/12 season; they also perform a new work by John Adams with the San Francisco Symphony in March as part of the American Mavericks concerts.
The ST. LAWRENCE STRING QUARTET (SLSQ) has established itself among the world-class chamber ensembles of its generation . Its mission : bring every piece of music to the audience in vivid color, with pronounced communication and teamwork, and great respect to the composer. Since winning both the Banff International String Quartet Competition and Young Concert Artists International Auditions in 1992, the Quartet has delighted audiences with its spontaneous, passionate, and dynamic performances. “The St. Lawrence are remarkable not simply for the quality of their music making, exalted as it is, but for the joy they take in the act of connection:Whether playing Haydn or premiering a new work, the SlSQ has a rare ability to bring audiences to rapt attention.They reveal surprising nuances in familiar repertoire and illuminate the works of some of today's most celebrated composers. often all in the course of one evening. John Adams has written two critically-acclaimed works expressly for the quartet including String Quartet (2009), and Absolute Jest (2012), which they premiered with the San Francisco Symphony in 2012. In 2011, SLSQ premiered Qohelet, a work composed for them by Osvaldo Golijov.SLSQ maintains a busy touring schedule . Some 2013-14 season highlights include visits to Vancouver, Princeton, Portland (OR), Toronto, Philadelphia Ann Arbor, Palm Beach, Washington. DC and a premiere of a newer work by George Tsontakis in CarmeL California. They will perform Absolute Jest with the Toronto Symphony and on a European tour with the San Francisco Symphony. During the summer season. SLSQ is proud to continue its long association with the Spoleto Festival in Charleston, South Carolina.Since 1998 the SLSQ has held the position of Ensemble in Residence at Stanford University. This residency includes working with music students as well as extensive collaborations with other faculty and departments using music to explore myriad topics. Recent collaborations have involved the School of Medicine, School of Education, and the Law School. In addition to their appointment at Stanford the SLSQ are visiting artists in residence at Arizona State University atTempe.The foursome's passion for opening up musical arenas to players and listeners alike is evident in their annual summer chamber music seminar at Stanford and their many forays into the depths of musical meaning with preeminent music educator Robert Kapilow.
Lesley Robertson and Geoff Nuttall are founding members of the group, and hail from Edmonton Alberta and London Ontario, respectively. Christopher Costanza is from Utica NY, and joined the group in 2003. Mark Fewer, a native of Newfoundland begins his first season with the quartet in 2014, succeeding violinist Scott St. John. All four members of the quartet live and teach at Stanford in the Bay Area of California.

36  Belcea Quartet
Founded at the Royal College of Music in London 20 years ago, the Belcea Quartet is based in Great Britain but comprised of diverse cultural backgrounds (French, Romanian, Polish) that contribute to their dynamic and free interpretive style. Their diverse influences are reflected in repertoire that pairs contemporary works with the Quartet’s profound connection to the great repertoire of the Classical and Romantic periods.
Established at the Royal College of Music in 1994. the BELCEA QUARTET was swiftly recognized as an outstanding ensemble by Wigmore Hall (London), where theywere resident quartet from 2001 to 2006 and with which they continue to enjoy a close relationship. and by EMI Classics, with whom they recorded exclusively for many years. The Belcea Quartet is currently Quartet-in-Residence at the Guildhall Schoolof Music and Drama (London) and has been Ensemble-in-Residence at the Vienna Konzerthaus since the 2010-11 season.The Belcea Quartet's international engagements regularly take them to the Laeiszhalle (Hamburg). Konserthus Stockholm. Concertgebouw Amsterdam. Palais des Beaux Arts (Brussels). Gulbenkian Auditorium (Lisbon), Carnegie Hall and Alice TullyHall (New York). and Herbst Theater (San Francisco). They also appear frequently inthe Edinburgh, Aldeburgh, Bath, Cheltenham, and Salzburg festivals as well as in the Schubertiade Schwarzenberg. They made their debut at the BBC Late Night Proms in 2011 with a performance of Schuberfs String Quintet with Valentin Erben. Other leading artists with whom they have collaborated include Thomas Ades, Piotr Anderszewski, Imogen Cooper. Paul Lewis, Michael Collins. Martin FrOst, Anne Sofie von Otter. Angelika Kirchschlager, and Ian Bostridge. They are committed to contemporary music and in recent years have given world premieres of works by Thomas Larcher. Mark Anthony Turnage, and Huw Watkins.Last season. the Belcea embarked on an ambitious survey of Beethoven·s string quartets. In the UK, the complete cycle was presented at Wigmore Hall, St. George·s Hall Liverpool, The Sage Gateshead. and Aldeburgh, where the concerts were recorded live with Volume I due for release this fall. The project was also presented in full in the Laeiszhalle Hamburg, Vienna Konzerthaus (where the concerts were filmed live for DVD), and at the Schubertiade Schwarzenberg, The project will be taken to Italy, Switzerland, and Sweden.Highlights of the Belcea Quartet's current season include a 10-city tour of the US (with three concerts of Beethoven's late string quartets at Carnegie Hall), performances of Haydn's Seven Last Words with Thomas Quasthoff as narrator, Shostakovich's Piano Quintet with Menahem Pressler, Dvorak's Piano Quintet with Till Fellner, and Strauss's Metamorphosen with Nicolas Bone, Eckart Runge, and Alois Posch to launch their 2012/13 Vienna Konzerthaus season,The Belcea Quartet's discography for EMI includes a recording of the late Schubert Quartets and the String Quintet with Valentin Erben; Brahms's String Quartet, Op, 51, No, I and the String Quintet, No, 2 with Thomas Kakuska; Faure's La Bonne Chanson with Ian Bostridge; Schubert's "Trout" Quintet with Thomas Ades and Corin Long; Britten's string quartets; Mozart's "Dissonance" and "Hoffmeister" quartets; and the complete Bartok quartets, Awards they have received include a Gramophone Award for "Best Debut Recording," Diapason d'Or, a MIDEM Cannes Award, and an Echo Kassik Award for "Chamber Music Ensemble of the Year,"

37  NT - The Audience
High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater. Helen Mirren reprises her Academy Award winning role as Queen Elizabeth II in the highly-anticipated West End production of The Audience. For sixty years Elizabeth II has met each of her twelve Prime Ministers in a private weekly audience at Buckingham Palace. Both parties have an unspoken agreement never to repeat what is said. The Audience imagines a series of pivotal meetings, from Churchill to Cameron, each Prime Minister using the conversations as a sounding board and a confessional – sometimes intimate, sometimes explosive. And, from young mother to grandmother, these private audiences chart the arc of the second Elizabethan Age.

38  Gate Theatre
Straight from Ireland’s acclaimed Gate Theatre is a double-bill of two one-act plays by the great Irish modernist writer, playwright, and humorist Samuel Beckett. The Gate is largely considered the leading interpreter of Beckett in the world; it’s like seeing the Maly Drama Theatre perform Chekhov or The Globe perform Shakespeare. Endgame, like Waiting for Godot, is considered one of Beckett’s most important works, written in a style associated with the Theatre of the Absurd. Watt, a novel written while Beckett was in hiding during World War II, is the extraordinary story of an itinerant character who one day walks from a train station to the home of a Mr. Knott, whom he will serve. The bizarre adventures of Watt and his struggles to make sense of the world around him are told with elegant simplicity, immense pathos, and explosive humor. Barry McGovern, who performs the role of Watt, selected the texts from the novel for this one-man performance. "Quite simply outstanding...I got an almost delirious joy from hearing, and seeing, an hour-long distillation of Beckett’s novel, Watt." (Guardian)
The Gate Theatre Dublin has been, artistically and architecturally, a landmark building for over 250 years. Established as a theater company in 1928 by Hilton Edwards and Micheal MacLiammoir, the Gate offered Dublin audiences an introduction to the world of European and American theater and also to classics from the modern and Irish repertoire. It was with the Gate that Orson Welles, James Mason, and Michael Gambon began their prodigious acting careers.Today, in its 83rd year, the Gate has become unique in that it has had only two artistic directorates. In 1983, the directorship passed to Michael Colgan under whose guidance the theater continues to represent Ireland at the very highest level of artistic endeavor, receiving numerous invitations each year to major festivals on every continent.
The Gate has a close association with the works of Samuel Beckett, the late Harold Pinter, Brian Friel, and Conor McPherson, among others. Having presented many major festivals, both internationally and at home, the Gate continues to develop, nurture, and promote the works of a diverse range of playwrights and is committed to delivering the very highest quality productions that its audiences have come to expect.

39  Stile Antico
One of the most talked-about events two years ago was the young British  ensemble Stile Antico, which is now firmly established as one of the  most original and exciting new groups in the choral music world. The  group’s most recent release, Song of Songs, won the 2009  Gramophone Award for Early Music. Working without a conductor, the 12  members of Stile Antico rehearse and perform as chamber musicians, each  contributing artistically to the end result. Their performances have  been repeatedly praised for their vitality and commitment, expressive  lucidity, and imaginative response to text. For this return engagement,  Stile Antico moves across town to the beautiful sanctuary of St.  Andrew’s Episcopal Church, where they will perform a program of Tudor  music for Christmas and Advent. The program is centered on Thomas  Tallis’s magnificent seven-part “Christmas” mass, written for the  combined choirs of the Spanish and English Chapels Royal and first  performed in December 1554. The mass is interspersed with  contemporaneous liturgical settings for Advent and Christmas, from the  perfect miniatures of William Byrd’s exquisite Propers for the Fourth  Sunday of Advent to Robert White’s exuberant setting of the Magnificat  and John Sheppard’s extraordinary Verbum Caro.
Stile Antico is an ensemble of young British singers, now established as one of the most original and exciting voices in its field.Much in demand in concert, the group performs regularly throughout Europe and North America. Their recordings on the Harmonia Mundi label have enjoyed great success, winning awards including the Diapason d'or de I'annee and the Preis der deutschen Schallplattenkritik, and have twice attracted Grammy Award nominations. Their recent release,Song of Songs,won the 2009 Gramophone Award for Early Music and reached the top of the US classical chart.Working without a conductor, the members of Stile Antico rehearse and perform as chamber musicians, each contributing artistically to the musical result. Their performances have repeatedly been praised for their vitality and commitment, expressive lucidity, and imaginative response to text. Stile Antico's repertoire ranges from the glorious legacy of the English Tudor composers to the works of the Flemish and Spanish schools and the music of the early Baroque. They are regularly invited to lead courses at Darlington International Summer School, and their commitment to educational work has been recognized through generous funding from the National Lottery through Arts Council England.Stile Antico's recent engagements include debuts at the BBC Proms; the Amsterdam Concertgebouw; early music festivals in Boston, Bruges, Barcelona, and Utrecht; and at the Cervantino Festival in Mexico. The group has toured extensively with Sting, appearing across Europe, Australia, and the Far East as part of his Dowland project Songs from the Labyrinth. In 2011, Stile Antico made its debut at London's Wigmore Hall, appeared at leading festivals throughout Europe, and toured twice in the US.

40  Einstein on the Beac
“The most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious.” — Albert Einstein
Widely credited as one of the greatest artistic achievements of the 20th  century, this rarely performed and revolutionary work launched director  Robert Wilson and composer Philip Glass to international success when  it was first produced in Avignon, France in 1976 with subsequent  performances in Europe and at the Metropolitan Opera. It is still  recognized as one of their greatest masterpieces. Now, nearly four  decades after it was first performed and 20 years since its last  production, Einstein on the Beach will be reconstructed for a major international tour including the first North American presentations ever held outside of New York City.
Einstein on the Beach breaks all of the rules of conventional  opera. Instead of a traditional orchestral arrangement, Glass composed  for the synthesizers, woodwinds, and voices of the Philip Glass  Ensemble. Non-narrative in form, the work uses a series of powerful  recurrent images as its main dramatic device, shown in juxtaposition  with abstract dance sequences created by American choreographer Lucinda  Childs. There are no traditional intermissions; audiences are free to  wander in and out at liberty during the five-hour performance. The New York Times  critic John Rockwell said, “Einstein was like nothing I had ever  encountered…Its very elusiveness radiated richly, like some dark star  whose effects we can only feel…Einstein on the Beach, perhaps  like Einstein himself, transcended time. It’s not (just) an artifact of  its era, it’s timeless…an experience to cherish for a lifetime.”
Prior to the production’s final technical rehearsals and world première in Montpellier, France, UMS will host the production’s creators, musicians, performers, and crew for three weeks  as they reconstruct and rehearse the work for what is likely to be the  final world tour designed and led by its original creators. A rare  chance to see a work of this scale in progress, these preview  performances will be the only opportunity to see Einstein on the Beach in the Midwest.

41  Chamber Ens of the S
The 20 members of the Chamber Ensemble of the Shanghai Chinese Orchestra  are drawn from the first large-scale modern orchestra of traditional  instruments in China. The Chamber Ensemble features music that  represents the gallant warriors of the past, the happy days of  childhood, a foggy spring morning after a night of rain, and other  poetic images brought to life by these iconic musicians. They perform on  the zheng, dizi, erhu, pipa, and other Chinese instruments  seldom featured in the West. While Chinese stars such as Lang Lang have  brought new attention to Western classical music in China, this ensemble  provides a window into the traditional Chinese classical music that  dates back centuries.
Founded in 1952, the Shanghai Chinese Orchestra is the first large-scale modern Chinese orchestra in China. The OrchestraChamber Ensemble of the Shanghai Chinese Orchestrais famous for the unique collaborations between its members and its mastery of diverse works. The Orchestra plays an important role in the development of Chinese music.
The Shanghai Chinese Orchestra continues to develop an extensive repertoire, performed by renowned musicians. Its performance repertoire includes large-format Chinese orchestral works as well as mid- and small-scale traditional works, such as stringed and wind instrumental pieces, Cantonese music, plucked-string instrumental ensembles, and percussion instrumental ensembles. The Shanghai Chinese Orchestra is also actively engaged in composition, which contributes to the Orchestra's rich repertoire. These compositions 'have received awards from a variety of venues, including the Shanghai Spring International Music Festival and the Shanghai International Art Festival, as well as venues around the world.
The Shanghai Chinese Orchestra has per­ formed in more than 80 cities in China and has toured to more than 30 countries and regions throughout the world. The Orchestra often per­ forms for prestigious audiences, including the presidents and chairmen of other countries when they visit China. In 2001 and 2003, the Orchestra performed two Chinese New Year concerts—The Year of Snake New Year Concert and The Year of Goat New Year Concert in the Musikverein, Vi­ enna—to wide acclaim in Europe. In addition, the Orchestra is frequently invited to perform in major activities at home, such as the 2006 Shanghai Co­ operation Organization summit, the ASEAN Sum­ mit, the 2007 Special Olympics Games, the 2008 and 2010 Shanghai National Day Concert, and the 2010 Shanghai EXPO Week.

42  Zakir Hussain
Zakir Hussain is today appreciated both in the field of percussion and  in the music world at large as an international phenomenon. His playing  is marked by uncanny intuition and masterful improvisational dexterity,  founded in formidable knowledge and study. The favorite accompanist of  many of India’s greatest classical musicians and dancers, he has not let  his genius rest there. Hussain is widely considered a chief architect  of the contemporary world music movement, with many historic  collaborations including Shakti, which he founded with John McLaughlin  and L. Shankar in the early 1970s, Sangam with Charles Lloyd and Eric  Harland, and recordings and performances with artists as diverse as  George Harrison, Van Morrison, Rennie Harris, and the Kodo Drummers of  Japan. For this return appearance, he performs with a host of Indian  classical music greats, topped off by the dancing drummers of Manipur.
A classical tabla virtuoso of the highest order, his consistently brilliant and exciting performances have not only established him as a national treasure in his own country, India, but gained him worldwide fame. His playing is marked by uncanny intuition and masterful improvisational dexterity, founded in formidable knowledge and study. The favorite accompanist for many of India's greatest classical musicians and dancers, he has not let his genius rest there.
Widely considered a chief architect of the contemporary world music movement, Zakir's contribution to world music has been unique, with many historic collaborations, including Shakti (which he founded with John McLaughlin and L. Shankar), Remember Shakti, the Diga Rhythm Band, Making Music, Planet Drum with Mickey Hart, Tabla Beat Science, Sangam with Charles Lloyd and Eric Harland, and recordings and performances with artists as diverse as George Harrison, YoYo Ma, Joe Henderson, Van Morrison, Airto Moreira, Pharoah Sanders, Billy Cobham, Mark Morris, Rennie Harris, and the Kodo drummers. His 2009 recording with frequent collaborators and trio-mates Bela Fleck and Edgar Meyer, The Melody of Rhythm, was nominated for a Grammy in 2010.
The foremost disciple of his father, the legendary Ustad Allarakha, Hussain was a child prodigy who began his professional career at the age of 12 and had toured internationally with great success by the age of 18. He has been the recipient of many awards, grants, and honors, including Padma Bhushan (2002), Padma Shri (1988), the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award (1991), KalidasSamman (2006), the 1999 National Heritage Fellowship Award, the Bay Area Isadora Duncan Award (1998-99), and Grammy Awards in 1991 and 2009 for "Best World Music Album" for Planet Drum and Global Drum Project, both collaborations with Mickey Hart. His artistry and extraordinary contribution to the music world were honored in April 2009 with four widely heralded and sold-out concerts in Carnegie Hall's Perspectives series. Also in 2009, Zakir was named a Member in the Order of Arts and Letters by France's Ministry of Culture and Communication. Most recently, the National Symphony Orchestra with Christoph Eschenbach commissioned and premiered Zakir's Concerto for Four Soloists at the Kennedy Center for Performing Arts, which was met with great acclaim.

43  Aspen Santa Fe Balle
“Simply breathtaking,” proclaims the Chicago Sun-Times about Aspen Santa  Fe Ballet, whose UMS debut features a program of contemporary ballet  that exemplifies the company’s commitment to commissioning dance by both  world-renowned and emerging choreographers. With a European aesthetic  grounded in American sensibilities, this 11-member troupe of classically  trained dancers has developed a worldwide following. “Stark, sleek, and  chock-full of moves that skirt the edges of contemporary movement.” (The Boston Globe)
Aspen Santa Fe Ballet began in Aspen in 1996, and a partnership four  years later led to the creation of a company that splits its time  between Aspen and Santa Fe. Artistic director Tom Mossbrucker, a former  principal dancer with the Joffrey Ballet, has been with the company  since the beginning. He is dedicated to presenting an eclectic  repertoire and committed to acquiring new works that persistently  challenge, enliven, and education both audiences and the company  dancers.

44  Rhinoceros
A farce. A tragedy. An experiment of the mind. Rhinocéros was  initially a short story written in 1957 by Eugène Ionesco (1909-1994),  who was influenced by his time in Romania as a young man when nearly  everyone around him converted to fascism. Alongside Samuel Beckett, Jean  Genet, and Harold Pinter, Ionesco was a major figure of the “Theater of  the Absurd.”
Rhinocéros begins in a small town square where Jean meets his  apathetic friend Berenger for a drink. A rhinoceros runs through the  square, shocking all except Berenger. The square is soon overrun as  people in the town begin to transform into rhinos. Berenger, on the  other hand, transforms from being indifferent and aimless to a having  something to believe in and fight against: the tyranny of the rhinos. A  parable about French collaboration with the Nazis, Rhinocéros serves as a metaphor for people resisting the crowd and standing up for their own ideas.
The Théâtre de la Ville production of Rhinocéros has been hailed  for its illuminating and insightful approach to Ionesco’s celebrated  play, skillfully setting astonishing moments of physical theater and  movement in a staging that showcases both the haunting beauty of  Ionesco’s words and his singular vision for the stage. Remaining true to  the spirit and letter of the play, the production rekindles the  staggering sense of urgency and risk conveyed by the script, as it  depicts the struggle of one man to maintain his individual identity and  integrity in a world where others have successively yielded to the  inevitable domination of brute force. When the play was first presented  in Paris, critics were ecstatic. “A masterpiece,” raved Le Monde. “A veritable tour de force on the part of the director… [and] a magical embrace between the show and the spectator.”
Experimental, emotional, and emphatic – this performance is not to be missed.
Performed in French with English supertitles.
"Theatre de Ia Ville is designed to host national and international creation. to bring together all performing arts forms. Under the direction of Emmanuel Demarcy-Mota, it echoes a reflection. an interest, and an increased sensitivity for artists who are at the crossroads of various disciplines."Created in 1968. under the auspices of the City of Paris. and dedicated to "art in the diversity of its theatrical, choreographic, and musical forms" as stated by its founder, Jean Mercure. Theatre DE LA VILLE has become one of the most important cultural landmarks in Paris, mostly through its multidisciplinary and international dimension in dance and music. With its two venues. a I,OOO-seat hall in the heart of Paris and the more intimate 400-seat theater in Montmartre, Theatre de Ia Ville offers approximately 100 different programs each season.
Theater in non-French languages had not been presented at Theatre de la Villein the 20 years prior to Mr. Demarcy-Mota·s arrival. In those first seasons. he invited directors Robert Wilson. Heiner Goebbels, Guy Cassiers, and Romeo Castellucci, and renewed links with several great European theaters. including the Berliner Ensemble and Piccolo Teatro of Milano. At the same time. he opened the theater to new artists from Chile. Japan. Russia, Argentina, Great Britain,ltaly. Poland. and the United States (with the two-year residency of Nature Theater of Oklahoma).Relying on the strongholds of Theatre de la Ville. Mr. Demarcy-Mota developed the theater to face the contemporary world, building and continuing partnerships with great contemporary choreographers including Pina Bausch. Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker, Sankai Juku, Alain Platel, and Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui.ln 2008. while Merce Cunningham was still alive, an agreement was formed with the company to present the Cunningham company in Paris, in cooperation with the Festival d·Automne for three consecutive years. New choreographers were also invited. including Israel Galvan. Hofesh Schechter, Lemi Ponifasio, as well as the younger French and foreign generation.A producing company and artistic ensemble was also formed, bringing together Mr. Demarcy-Mota's actors, designer, and composer to stage work within the theater, engage artistic research, and participate in educational activities and audience development. The works developed by the ensemble, under Mr. Demarcy-Mota's direction. have toured throughout France and abroad. including appearances in Russia, Portugal, Luxembourg, England, and Turkey.
When appointed in 2008, artistic director Emmanuel Demarcy-Mota was the youngest director of the theater's history. Wishing to enhance the remarkable opening of Theatre de la Ville to the world and the arts, he designed a new series of artistic initiatives.Recently, Theatre de la Ville has initiated a new project directed towards younger audiences called "Parcours enfance et jeunesse." which, in cooperation with five other Parisian venues. provides a multidisciplinary and international program experience for young people, setting young people on a path whereby the performing arts will be a part of their adult lives. Theatre de la Ville is funded by the City of Paris.

45  Gilberto Gil
Gilberto Gil has modernized – and continues to modernize – Brazilian  popular music. From musical revolutionary to international pop star to  beloved statesman, Gilberto Gil has lived a life worthy of a Hollywood  thriller. As a founding member of Brazil’s Tropicália movement, Gil and  fellow Bahians Caetano Veloso and Gal Costa radically reinvented  Brazilian popular music in the mid-60s by combining Beatlesque  psychedelia, art rock, and Brazil’s northeastern roots rhythms. Since  returning to Brazil from his London exile in the early 1970s, Gil has  held center stage as a charismatic performer and songwriter. With  several dozen standards to his credit, he has been interpreted by just  about every major Brazilian artist of the past four decades. In recent  years Gil once again found inspiration in the joyful, upbeat  accordion-driven forró style of music and dance, starting with his soundtrack to the award-winning 2000 film Me You Them. After serving as Brazil’s Minister of Culture from 2003-2008, he went on to explore classics by forró heroes Luiz Gonzaga and Jackson do Pandeiro on his latest album, Fé Na Festa. Expect a party — and expect to dig deeply into Brazil’s musical heritage with one of the country’s major cultural icons.
GILBERTO GIL's musical career began playing the accordion during the 19505, inspired by Luiz Gonzaga, the sound of the radio. and the religious parades intown. Within the Northeast of Brazil, Mr. Gil explored a rural folk sound early on, until he heard the emergent )ooa Gilberta. the popular basso nova, and composer and singer Dorival Caymmi. with his coastal beach sounds, so different from the world of wilderness he was used to. Moved by these new influences, Mr. Gil opted for a guitar over the accordion, then the electric guitar, which still harbors the particular harmonies of his present work. Beginning with his early songs, Mr. Gil portrayed and represented his country and his musicianship began to develop unique rhythmic and melodic qualities. His first LP. Louvacao (Worship). released in 1967. concentrated his personal way of translating regional components into music, as evidenced in the renowned songs “Louvacao,”, “Procissao”, ”Roda." and 'Viramundo."In 1963. after meeting his friend Caetano Veloso at the University of Bahia. Mr.Gil and Mr. Veloso began a partnership and a movement that contemplated and internationalized music, theater. visual arts. cinema. and all of Brazilian art. The so-called Tropicalia, or tropicalist movement, involved talented multidisciplinary artists such as Gal Costa, Tom Ze, Rogerio Duprat, Joseph Capinam. Torquato Neto. Rogerio Duarte. Nara Leao, and others. The movement discontented the then current dictatorship, which considered Tropicillia harmful to society with its libertarian actions and creations, and eventually exiled its primary partners.
Mr. Gil"s exile in London contributed to an even greater influence of The Beatles, Jimi Hendrix. and the entire pop world at the time that loomed in the work of Mr. Gil. who also made a record in London. with songs recorded in both Portuguese and English.Upon returning to Brazil, Gilberto Gil continued a prolific recording schedule,which lasts until today. He has released 52 albums in total. with 4 million copies sold worldwide. and being recognized with nine Grammy Awards. Including his most recent recording. Fe na Festa. Mr. Gil has created a vast and comprehensive video and musical body of work.Each new project venture has its forms consolidated in various tours around the world. Every album becomes a tour. and many tours become live records. Always willing to undertake national and international tours for each new project, Mr. Gil's international presence is confirmed each year in major festivals and theaters in Europe, and he has made several tours throughout the Americas, Asia, Africa, and Oceania, He has a captive audience for his concerts abroad, since his first international public performances in 1971, and from his remarkable participation in the Montreux Festival in 1978.In 2002, following his appointment as Minister of Culture of Brazil, Gilberto Gil continued to navigate the international socio-political, environmental, and international cultural landscape, Under the Ministry in particular, he designed and implemented new policies ranging from the creation of the Pontos de Cultura (Cultural Hotspots) to the lead presence of Brazil in forums, seminars, and conferences worldwide, working on topics ranging from new technology, copyright. cultural development, cultural diversity and the place of Southern countries in the globalized world,Gilberto Gil's multiple activities have been recognized by various nations and international bodies, including being named Artist for Peace by UNESCO in 1999 and Ambassador of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Mr. Gil has been bestowed honors and awards as diverse as France's Legion d'honneur and Sweden's Polar Music Prize,

46  Prudencia Hart
Join us for a spellbinding and intimate experience – where you become part of the performance.
Pull up a chair and wet your whistle for an evening of anarchic theater,  live music, and strange goings-on as UMS takes theater into the pub,  moving to the Corner Brewery in Ypsilanti for six performances.
One wintry morning, Prudencia Hart, an uptight academic, sets off to  attend a conference in the Scottish Borders, the region of Scotland that  borders England. As the snow begins to fall, she finds herself trapped  in a secluded bar with strangers, only to be swept away on an  enchanting, dream-like journey of self-discovery filled with magical  moments, devilish encounters, and wittily wild karaoke.

47  Martha Graham Dance
Founded in 1926 by pioneering choreographer Martha Graham, this modern  dance company is one of the oldest and most celebrated in America.  Graham’s innovative body of work stands alongside that of Pablo Picasso,  Igor Stravinsky, George Balanchine, and Coco Chanel as a pillar of  20th-century Modernism. Her company has performed all over the world,  including at the base of the Great Pyramids and in the ancient Herod  Atticus Theatre on the Acropolis. The Martha Graham Dance Company has  nurtured many choreographers of the 20th and 21st centuries, including  Merce Cunningham, Pearl Lang, Paul Taylor, Pascal Rioult, and U-M’s  Peter Sparling, whose film montage opens Friday’s program. The Saturday  evening performance brings back the work of Robert Wilson (Einstein on the Beach),  who created a magical evocation of Graham as an artist, using abstract  forms and movements to recall the American images that gave meaning to  her work and her life.
THE MARTHA GRAHAM DANCE COMPANY has been a leader in the development of contemporary dance since its founding in 1926. Informed by the expansive vision of its pioneering founder, the Company has expanded contemporary dance's vocabulary with masterpieces such as Appalachian Spring Lamentation, and Chronicle. rooted in social political, psychological and sexual contexts.Always a fertile ground for experimentation. the Martha Graham Dance Company has been an unparalleled resource in nurturing many of the leading choreographers and dancers of the 20th and 21st centuries. Graham's groundbreaking techniqUe and unmistakabIe style have earned the Company acclaim from audiences in more than SO countries throughout North and South America Europe Africa Asia and the Middle East.Today. the Company continues to foster Graham's spirit of ingenuity. It embraces a new vision that showcases classics by Graham. Her contemporaries and their successors alongside newly commissioned works. The Company is actively working to create new platforms for contemporary dance and multiple points of access for audiences.

48  Mariachi Vargas de T
We are proud to bring back Mariachi Vargas de Tecalitlán after an  extremely popular UMS debut in November 2010. Mariachi Vargas is one of  the most highly regarded ensembles in the history of mariachi,  decisively shaping the art form. Founded in a small city near Jalisco by  Don Gaspar Vargas in the 1890s, this band basically invented the modern  mariachi, and five generations later, is still playing today. They have  recorded over 100 CDs, with original songs and arrangements that set  the standard for mariachi music. Masters at melding the old world style  of mariachi music with new, innovative pieces, Mariachi Vargas is  appealing to audiences across all generations.
The MARIACHI VARGAS DE TECALITLAN's highly energized performances are second to none. Quite simply, Mariachi Vargas performances surpass even the highest expectations. The music is performed with incredible precision and yet it remains nE'V{ and fresh. even to audiences that have seen multiple concerts. Mariachi Vargas is the goldstandard in mariachi music.The group performing today represents the sixth generation of Mariachi Vargas de Tecalitlan and members vary in lengths of tenure. Maestro Ruben Fuentes is at the helm of the group and has been with Mariachi Vargas since 1944. Amongst the 13 performers. Federico Torres (trumpet) has been with the group for 47 years since 1966, while Daniel Martinez (vocalist and violinist) and Enrique de Santiago (guitarron) have been with the group approximately 26 years. respectively. Jose kPepe" Martinez. Sr. (vocalist and violinist) has been the ensemble's musical director for 38 years since 1975. MiguelAngel Barr6n is the group's newest member who joined in 2011 as the vihuela player. Several members of the group live in Guadalajara Jalisco, Mexico (the capital of mariachi) and others live in Mariachi Vargas' official home base in Mexico City.Mariachi Vargas de Tecalitlan tours year-round throughout the world. The group has performed in Spain, Japan, the Czech Republic and Paris, France where they played six performances of the world's first mariachi opera Cruzor 10 Cora de 10 Luna in September 2011. Cruzar la Cara de la Luna was composed by Jose "Pepe" Martinez to a libretto by Leonard Foglia. The mariachi opera opened in November 2010 in Houston, Texas. When not touring. the group is composing and/or arranging nE'V{ pieces, rehearsing nE'V{ material or working in the recording studio. Every year, they perform in more than 2S US cities and twice as many throughout Latin AmericaMariachi Vargas has recorded more than 200 albums since their founding in 1898. Their latest CD, titled 115 Aniversorio, pays tribute to their llSth anniversary and includes music written by famous Latin composers including Juan Luis Guerra Emilio Estefan. Marco A. Solis. Joan Sebastien. Ruben Fuentes, and Camilo Sesto.Opening for Mariachi Vargas at tonight's concert is Texas State University student Karen Zavala who was selected by members of Mariachi Vargas as the "Best Mariachi Vocalist in the US" during San Antonio's 18th Annual Mariachi Vargas Extravaganza.

49  The Silk Road Ensemb
Yo-Yo Ma thinks it can: “I believe that when we enlarge our view of the  world, we deepen our understanding of our own lives and culture.”
“Yo-Yo Ma is part modern Marco Polo, an explorer of cultures far beyond  his own; part musical missionary, eager to share ideas and make vital  connections between peoples.” (Chicago Tribune) Founded by Yo-Yo  Ma in 1998, the Silk Road Project is about “seeing the world’s multiple  perspectives, stirring the imagination, getting people to dream.” It has  been a catalyst for a new kind of conversation, opening avenues of  inter-cultural communication and collaborative thinking. For about 2,000  years the Silk Road was the main conduit for the spread and exchange of  goods, ideas, religions, and culture, connecting people from Asia to  the Mediterranean. The collective is drawn from internationally renowned  musicians who share traditions from various cultures and develop and  perform new music and multimedia pieces, exploring and expanding  contemporary music crossroads. Yo-Yo Ma believes that “when we enlarge  our view of the world, we deepen our understanding of our own lives and  culture.”
At this concert, Yo-Yo Ma and the Silk Road Project will be recognized  as recipients of the 2013 UMS Distinguished Artists Award, presented as  part of the Ford Honors Program.
The many-faceted career of cellist YO-YO MA is testament to his continualsearch for new ways to communicate with audiences and to his personal desire for artistic growth and renewal. Mr. Ma maintains a balance between his engagements as soloist with orchestras worldwide and his recital and chamber music activities. His discography includes aver 75 albums, including more than 15 Grammy Awardwinners.Mr. Ma serves as the Artistic Director of the Silk Road Project. an organization he founded to promote the study of cultural artistic. and intellectual traditions along the ancient Silk Road trade routes. Since the Project's inception more than 70 works have been commissioned specifically for the Silk Road Ensemble. which toUTS annually. Mr. Ma also serves as the judson and Joyce Green Creative Consultant to the ChicagoSymphony Orchestra's Institute for Learning. Access, and Training. His work focuses on the transfonnative power music can have in individuals' lives, and on increasing the number and variety of opportunities audiences have to experience music in their communities.Mr. Ma was born in Paris to Chinese parents who later moved the family to New York.. He began to study cello at the age of four, attended The Juilliard School and in 1976 graduated from Harvard University. He Ms received numerous awards, among them the 2001 National Medal of Arts. the 2006 Sonning Prize, the 2008 World Economic Forum's Crystal Award, and the 2010 Presidential Medal of Freedom. In 2011. Mr. Ma was recognized as a Kennedy Center Honoree. Mr.Ma serves as a UN Messenger ofPeace and as a member of the President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities. He has performed for eight American presidents. most recently at the invitation of President Obama on the occasion of the 56th Inaugural Ceremony.The SILK ROAD ENSEMBLE draws together distinguished performers and composers from more than 20 countries in Asia. Europe. and the Americas. Since the Ensemble formed under the artistic direction of Yo-Yo Ma in 2000, the group's innovative artists have eagerly explored contemporary musical crossroads. “A cornucopia of music ideas... featuring instrumental and vocal artists of almost unimaginable virtuosity.”“A kind of roving musical laboratory without walls.” The description is apt: the Ensemble's approach is experimental and democratic. founded on collaboration and risk-taking. on continual learning and sharing among a kaleidoscope of cultures and art forms.Members explore one another's traditions, celebrating the multiplicity of approaches to music from around the world. They also develop new repertoire that responds to the multicultural reality of our global society. "The Silk Road Ensemble vision of international cooperation is not what we read in our daily news reports. Theirs is the better world available if we, like these extraordinary musicians, agree to make it one.The Silk Road Ensemble has performed to critical acclaim throughout Asia. Europe. and North America and has recorded five albums. The Ensemble's most recent recording. Off the Map, was nominated for a Grammy Award. for "Best Classical Crossover Album' in 2011.

50  Ragamala Dance
Sacred Earth reframes the cultural specificity of Bharatanatyam,  bringing the eloquence of the form to universal themes in order to move  beyond the personal and spark a global conversation.
Experience a single evening that transcends barriers of culture,  ethnicity, nationality, and geography and speaks to a broad audience.  Choreographers Ranee and Aparna Ramaswamy use the philosophy and myth of  traditions to explore the interconnectedness between humans and the  landscapes that shape them. Accompanied by live music, the evening  builds from silent, meditative beginnings to a thrilling crescendo, the  performers surrender to the beauty of this sacred earth that has been  given to us to safeguard, cherish, and pass on to our future  generations.
Sacred Earth’s choreography, ranging from contemplative to  ecstatic, brings both internal (akam) and external (puram) landscapes to  life through two ephemeral visual traditions—kolam floor designs and  Warli wall paintings.  Kolams are rice flour designs made each morning  by women in southern India as conscious offerings to Mother Earth. This  daily ritual creates a sacred space and becomes a link between the  intimate home and the vastness of the outside world. The Warli people of  western India revere the land and live a life in perfect coexistence  with nature. Using their everyday lives as inspiration, their dynamic  wall paintings use art to find the spiritual in the everyday.
Acclaimed as one of the Indian Diaspora's leading ensembles, RAGAMALA DANCE seamlessly carries the South Indian classical dance form of Bharatanatyam into the 21st century. Artistic directors/choreographers Ranee and Aparna Ramaswamy - mother and daughter- are proteges of legendary dancer and choreographer Alarmel Valli known as one of India's greatest living masters. Ranee and Aparna retain roots in the philosophy, spirituality, mysticism. and myth of their South Indian heritage, while using their art form as a rich language through which to speak with their own voices as contemporary American choreographers. They see the classical form as a dynamic. living tradition with vast potential to move beyond the personal and spark a global conversation.Now in its 21st season. Ragamala's work has been supported by the National Endowment for the Arts. National Dance Project. MAP Fund. Japan Foundation. USArtists International and a Joyce A ward from the Joyce Foundation/Chicago. and has been commissioned by the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis and the American ComposersForum. Ragamala has been selected as an empaneled artist by the Indian Council onCultural Relations, the cultural diplomacy arm of the Government of India.Ragamala has toured extensively, both nationally and internationally. The company's 2011 performance at the Kennedy Center in Washington, DC was hailed as, “movingly meditative... [Ragamala] showed. how Indian forms can provide some of the most transcendent experiences that dance has to offer. This is an excellent company." Additional highlights include the American Dance Festival (Durham NC). New Victory Theater (New York. NY). Music Center of Los Angeles County (CA). Lied Center (Lawrence, KS) Phillips Center (Gainesville. FL), Walker Art Center (Minneapolis. MN). Bali Arts Festival (Bali. Indonesia). Open Look Dance Festival (St. Petersburg.         Festival of Spirituality and Peace (Edinburgh. UK) and National Centre for Performing Arts (Mumbai. India). In March of 2013. Ragamala premiered its newest work. 1,001 Buddhas: Journey of the Gods. at the Cowles Center for Dance in Minneapolis.Ragamala's 2013-14 season will be highlighted by Song of the Jasmine. a new work conceived and choreographed by Aparna Ramaswamy and created in collaboration with jazz saxophonist/ composer Rudresh Mahanthappa. Song of the Jasmine is commissioned by the Walker Art Center (Minneapolis) and co-commissioned by the Clarice Smith Performing Arts Center (University of Maryland). This new work will premiere at the Walker in May of 2014, followed by a national tour in 2014-15.

51  Complicite
Inspired by the work of one of the most important Japanese writers of the 20th century, Jun’ichiro Tanizaki, Shun-kin  tells a tale of devotion, passion, and power, where beauty is  unforgiving and love is blinding. The domineering and beautiful  Shun-kin, blinded as a young girl, is a brilliant player of the shamisen,  a stringed instrument. Her devoted student and servant will do anything  to share her world, ultimately becoming her lover and performing an  astonishing act of self-sacrifice. This powerful production, seen only  at the Lincoln Center, UCLA, and UMS, explores the relationship between  master teacher and student, showing just how fraught that relationship  can be. In Japanese with English supertitles.
COMPLICITE is celebrating 30 years of extraordinary theater this year. Since it was founded in 1983, the Company has toured the world and helped to shape the landscape of modern drama. From being smuggled into a shanty town in Chile to perform in 1984 to being broadcast live to cinemas across the globe i n 2010, Complicite has continued to experiment and collaborate, working with the Barbican, Royal National Theatre, Setagaya Public Theatre Tokyo, Emerson String Quartet Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra De Nederlandse Opera. and the Pet Shop Boys, among others. The Company's award-winning Creative Learning program both supports and illuminates its artistic work.In addition to Shun-kin's tour of the US, Japan. and Singapore, Simon McBurney's production of The Magic Flute will come to English National Opera in winter 2013, and the Company will begin development on its first feature film . This year, Complicite also created Lionboy, its first show for families and young people, directed by Company co-founder Annabel Arden.

52  Chris Thile
Chris Thile, of the progressive bluegrass band Punch Brothers, is a  mandolin virtuoso, composer, and vocalist. Encompassing progressive  bluegrass, classical, rock, and jazz, Thile transcends the borders of  conventionally circumscribed genres, creating a distinctly American  canon and a new musical aesthetic for performers and audiences alike.  Recently awarded a MacArthur “Genius” Grant (2013), Thile collaborated  with Yo-Yo Ma and Edgar Meyer on the Grammy-winning CD, The Goat Rodeo Sessions.  On this solo program, he draws from his recent recording of Bach  sonatas and partitas while also exploring his own compositions and  contemporary music.
In a review of his quintet Punch Brothers' latest Nonesuch recording.Who's Feeling Young Now?, CHRIS THILE the most remarkable mandolinist in the world: The MacArthur Foundation echoed that assessment when it named Mr.Thile one of its 23 MacArthur FellO'Ns for 2012 - a recipient of its prestigious genius grant." In honoring Mr.Thile, the MacArthur Foundation noted that his lyrical fusion of traditional bluegrass with elements from a range of other musical traditions is giving rise to a new genre of contemporary music.”Prior to recording the new Punch Brothers acclaimed album. Mr. Thile completed an album of tradition-upending interpretations of bluegrass classics with guitarist Michael Daves entitled Sleep With One Eye Open, which garnered a 2011 Grammy A ward nomination for "Best Bluegrass Album: He also recorded The Goat Rodeo Sessions with cellist Yo- Yo Ma violinist Stuart Duncan. and Mr. Thile's mentor and frequent collaborator Edgar Meyer, which won the 2012 Grammy Award for Best Folk Album.”After a lengthy 2012 Punch Brothers tour, Mr. Thile, always up for another challenge, immediately embarked on a series of duo dates with fellow virtuoso colleague and jazz pianist Brad Mehldau. The Washington Post heralded "Their complex work translated to plain-faced beauty: simple, direct. and exquisite: In between his Punch Brothers shows. Mr. Thile found time to present his Mandolin Concerto: Ad astra per alas porci with several chamber orchestras in the US, including a concert presentation at Carnegie Hall's Stem Auditorium.A child prodigy, Chis Thile first rose to fame as a member of Grammy Award-winning trio Nickel Creek. with whom he released three albums and sold 2 million records. As a soloist he has released five albums, as well as performing and recording extensively as a duo with Edgar Meyer and with fellow eminent mandolinist Mike Marshall. Other stellar musicians with whom Mr.Thile has collaborated include Bela Fleck and Hilary Hahn. Nonesuch Records released Chris Thile's most recent recording. Bach: Partitas and Sonatas. Vol. 1, produced by Mr.Meyer, this past August.

53  Blind Summit
A cantankerous puppet with a cardboard head is having an existential  crisis on a table. Blind Summit, theatrical innovators who have created  puppetry for Anthony Minghella, Complicite, and Danny Boyle’s Olympic  Opening Ceremony, presents epic puppetry inspired by Beckett, the Bible,  and Ikea. Hilarious, beautiful, and occasionally profound, this show is  a visual feast of Bunraku puppetry. “With considerable wit, Blind  Summit proves once again that when you’re working in miniature, you  don’t have to think small.”BLIND SUMMIT THEATRE are puppetry innovators. The company was formed in 1997 by Mark Down and Nick Barnes to reinvent traditional Japanese Bunroku for contemporary western audiences. They present new puppets in new places in new ways to new audiences, seeing puppetry as a radical part of the reinvention of theater in our time. Past productions include: The Magic Flute (Bregenz Festival), The Heads (London International Mime Festival at Soho Theatre), London 2012 Olympic Opening Ceremony (Danny Boyle) 1984 (Battersea Arts Centre and national tour), The Call of the Wild. Low Life (international tour), Madam Butterfly (Director Anthony Minghella END, Metropolitan Opera), A Dog's Heart (Complicite, DNO, ENO), Kommilitonen! (RAM and Juilliard, New  York), Faeries (ROH2), El Gato Con Botos (Broadway: Gotham Chamber Opera, Tectonic Theater), Shun-kin (Complicite, Setagaya Theatre Tokyo, Barbican), Angus. Thongs, and Even More Snogging (West Yorkshire Playhouse); Holy Flying Circus (BBC4), Greenland (National Theatre), On Emotion (Soho Theatre) His Dark Materials (Birmingham Rep and West Yorkshire Playhouse), Cherevichki (Garsington Opera), Romayana (Lyric Hammersmith, West Yorkshire Playhouse, Bristol Old Vic), Shakespeare Staging The World performance (RSC and the British Museum), Real Man, Pirate Puppetry, Martin's Wedding, The Spaceman. Mr. China's Son and Tramping the Boards.

54  RSC in HD - Richard
This first-ever cinema broadcast from the stage of the RSC features David Tennant in the title role of Richard II,  the fastest selling show in the RSC’s history and the first of  Shakespeare’s four plays about the House of Lancaster. Richard is King,  but also a man of very human weakness. But he is also a man of very  human weakness, a man whose vanity threatens to divide the great houses  of England and drag his people into a dynastic civil war that will last  100 years.

55  State Symphony Capel
Featuring 50 glorious voices, the State Symphony Capella of Russia was  founded in 1991 as a result of a merger of the USSR State Chamber Choir  and the State Symphony Orchestra of the USSR Ministry of Culture.  Specialists admire the strict performing discipline that reigns in the  collective, which results in beautiful flexibility of phrasing, a rich  and warm sound, noble expression, and skillful balance. Their flawless  vocal and choral technique, crystal-clear and precise intonation, and  unfailing attention to poetic words has led to captivating reviews,  including this one from Le Monde de la Musique in France: "What a  choir! Beautiful, noble, ideally balanced, diversity of timbres,  flawless, clear intonation…We can only dream about such a choir."
The Capella's first performance, of Dvorak's cantata The Spectre's Bride, took place in Decem- ber 1991 in the Grand Hall of the Moscow Conservatoire, under Gennady Rozhdestvensky. The con- cert was an outstanding success, setting from the outset the high creative standard of the ensemble and demonstrating its professionalism. In 1992, Valery Polyansky became the new artistic director and chief conductor of the Capella. The orchestra and choir that make up Mr. Polyansky's State Symphony Capella enjoy a certain creative autonomy from one another, giving concerts, making recordings, and touring independently. Together however, the Capella is able to perform some of the greatest works of classical music masses, oratorios, requiems, and cantatas that are scored for orchestra, choir, and soloists. The Capella's performances have included masses by Mozart, Schubert, Bruckner, and Liszt; the Requiems of Verdi, Cherubini, Brahms, Mozart, Dvorak, Britten, and Schnittke; Rachmaninoff's The Bells, Stravinsky's Wedding, and many operas-in-concert performances. A large number of works have been revived by Mr. Polyansky after they had fallen into obscurity, and thanks to him, the public has also had the opportunity to become acquainted with the work of a number of contemporary composers, in particular Sidelnikov, Gubaidulina, and Schnittke.

56  New Century Chamber
This San Francisco-based group made its UMS debut in February 2011 to  huge audience acclaim with a performance of remarkable precision,  passion, and power. Their return appearance with artistic director Nadja  Salerno-Sonnenberg offers the area premiere of a new work that NCCO  commissioned by U-M Professor Emeritus of Composition William Bolcom, as  well as Heitor Villa-Lobos’ hauntingly beautiful Bachianas Brasileiras No. 5.  “Salerno-Sonnenberg was and most definitely is a force to be reckoned  with [and] the superb musicianship of her cohorts ensured that it was  far more than her show.”
The NEW CENTURY CHAMBER ORCHESTRA. one of only a handful of conductorless ensembles in the world was founded in 1992 by cellist Miriam Perkeff and violist Wieslaw Pogorzelski. Musical decisions are made collaboratively by the 19-member string ensemble, including San Francisco Bay Area musicians and those who travel from across the US and Europe to perform together.World-renowned violin soloist chamber musician, and recording artist Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg leads from the concertmaster chair. She joined the ensemble as music director and concertmaster in January 2008 bringing “a new sense of vitality and determination, as well as an audacious swagger that is an unmistakable fingerprint of its leader,· according to Gramophone magazine. In 2011, Ms. Salerno-Sonnenberg and New Century embarked on the Orchestra's two most extensive tours to-date. The performances in the Midwest east coast and southern California garnered record-breaking audiences and national critical acclaim.In addition to performing classic pieces of chamber orchestra repertoire, New Century commissions important new works, breathes life into rarely heard jewels of the past, and performs world premieres. The New Century Chamber Orchestra Featured Composer program commissions composers to write new works, with the goals of expanding chamber orchestra repertoire and providing audiences with a deeper understanding of today's living composers. The orchestra provides insight into the breadth of the Featured Composer's work by performing a variety of pieces by the composer throughout the season. As part of its dedication to the future of music, New Century also provides musical education to students at elementary schools in Marin City and San Rafael's Canal District which cannot otherwise afford to offer music instruction.
The orchestra has released six compact discs. The two latest albums, T09ether (released August 2009) and liVE: Barber, Strauss. Mohler (released November       were recorded with Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg on the NSS Music label Other recordings include a 1996 collaborative project with Kent Nagano and the Berkeley Symphony Orchestra featuring the work of 20th century-Swiss composer Frank Martin, and Written With the Heart's Blood, a 1997 Grammy Award finalist New Albion label. In 1998 the orchestra recorded and released works of Argentine composers Alberto Williams and Alberto Ginastera on the d'Note label and in 2004, the orchestra recorded and released Oculus, a CD of Kurt Rohde's compositions on the Mondovibe label.All of the recordings have been distributed both internationally and in the US. The orchestra's first concert DVD, filmed by Paola di Florio, director of the 1999 Academy A ward-nominated film Speaking in Strings, was released on NSS MUSIC on Maya 2012.The DVD weaves together documentary footage and a live tour concert from a February 2011 performance at the Broad Stage in Santa Monica.

57  Emerson String Quart
Formed in the bicentennial year of the United States, the Emerson String  Quartet took its name from the great American poet and philosopher  Ralph Waldo Emerson. The group made its Ann Arbor debut in 1989, and in  14 appearances since has performed with the integrity, energy, and  commitment that it has demonstrated throughout more than 30 years of  extensive touring and recording. The Emerson’s unparalleled achievements  over the past three decades include nine Grammy awards (two for "Best  Classical Album," an unprecedented honor for a chamber music group),  three Gramophone Awards, the coveted Avery Fisher Prize, membership in  the American Classical Music Hall of Fame, and cycles of the complete  string quartets of Beethoven, Bartók, Mendelssohn, and Shostakovich in  the world’s music capitals. This return appearance features the Quartet  in an all-Mozart program, performing three quartets commissioned by the  King of Prussia, Friedrich Wilhelm II. “With musicians like this, there  must be some hope for humanity.” (The Times, London)
The Emerson String Quartet stands alone in the history of string quartets with an unparalleled list of achievements over three decades: more than 30 acclaimed recordings since 1987, nine Grammy Awards (including two for "Best Classical Album," an unprecedented honor for a chamber music group), three Gramophone Awards, the coveted Avery Fisher Prize and cycles of the complete Beethoven, Bartok, Mendelssohn, and Shostakovich string quartets in the world's musical capitals, from New York to London and Vienna. The Quartet has collaborated in concerts and on recordings with some of the greatest artists of our time. After 35 years of extensive touring and recording, the Emerson Quartet continues to perform with the same benchmark integrity, en­ergy, and commitment that it has demonstrated since it was formed in 1976.
In March 2011, Sony Classical announced an exclusive agreement with the Emerson String Quartet. The Quartet’s debut album for the label, Mozart's Prussian Quar­tets K. 575, K. 589, and K. 590, will be released in October 2011 to coincide with a series of concerts at Wigmore Hall in London and Alice Tully Hall in New York City. In the 11/12 season, its 35th sea­ son as an ensemble, the Quartet will perform extensively throughout North America and Europe, with concerts in Boston, Vancouver, Denver, Phila­delphia, Washington DC, San Diego, Houston, and Ann Arbor and on tours taking them to Germany, Denmark, Slovenia, Austria, England, Spain, Swit­zerland, Italy, and South Korea. The Quartet con­tinues its residency at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington DC, now in its 32nd season.Since 2002, the Quartet has been Quartet- in-Residence at Stony Brook University, coaching chamber music, giving master classes, and provid­ing instrumental instruction. The ensemble con­ ducted its first three International Chamber Music Workshops at Stony Brook in June 2004, 2006, and 2008. In addition to teaching duties, the group performs several concerts during the year at Stony Brook's Staller Center for the Arts, and continues its educational affiliation with Carnegie Hall. The Quartet has conducted three Professional Training Workshops at Carnegie's Weill Music In­stitute, focusing on the Bartok quartets, quintets of Brahms and Dvorak, and most recently the Beethoven quartets, in conjunction with the Per­spective Series. In 2000, the Quartet was named "Ensemble of the Year" by Musical America, and in March 2004, became the 18th recipient of the Avery Fisher Prize—another first for a chamber en­semble.
In 2000, the Quartet performed the complete Shostakovich quartets at New York's Lincoln Cen­ter and in London, with a cycle divided between the Wigmore Hall and the Barbican. Each series culminated with The Noise of Time, a theatrical presentation directed by Simon McBurney featur­ing the Quartet and Complicite, Mr. McBurney's theater company. Blending film, choreography, taped readings, and live music, the multimedia work explored the haunted life of Dmitri Shosta­kovich through his String Quartet No. 15 in e-flat minor, Op. 144. Since 2001, The Noise of Time has been repeated to great acclaim in Los Angeles, Berlin, Vienna, Paris, and Moscow. In 2008, New York Magazine named The Noise of Time one of the most important contributions to the arts in New York since the inception of the magazine.The theatrical nature of Shostakovich's music and its powerful effect on audiences led the Quar­tet to record the Shostakovich Quartets live dur­ing three summers of performances at the Aspen Music Festival. Meticulous editing eliminated virtu­ ally all background noise, and the recording on the Deutsche Grammophon label has been praised for its intensity and energy. The five-disc set won the 2000 Grammy Awards for "Best Classical Album" and "Best Chamber Music Performance," as well as Gramophone Magazine's "Best Chamber Music Performance" Award for 2000. Dedicated to the performance of classical repertoire, the Emerson String Quartet also has demonstrated a strong commitment to the commissioning and perfor­mance of 20th- and 21st-century music.Formed in the bicentennial year of the US, the Emerson String Quartet took its name from the great American poet and philosopher Ralph Wal­ do Emerson. Violinists Eugene Drucker and Philip Setzer alternate in the first chair position and are joined by violist Lawrence Dutton and cellist David Finckel. The Quartet has performed numerous ben­efit concerts for campaigns against AIDS, hunger, and juvenile diabetes. To commemorate its 25th anniversary season, the Quartet compiled a book entitled Converging Lines. Written in the members' own words, the book contains never-before-published text, graph­ics, and photos from the Quartet's private archives. The Quartet is based in New York City.

58  Les Violons du Roy
The chamber orchestra Les Violons du Roy borrows its name from the  renowned string orchestra of the court of the French kings. Based in  Québec City, the 15-member group was brought together in 1984 by music  director Bernard Labadie. They specialize in the vast repertoire of  music for chamber orchestra, performed on modern instruments in the  style most appropriate to each era. The orchestra has been widely  acclaimed for the exceptional energy, brilliance, and vitality of its  performances. The ensemble appeared with countertenor David Daniels for a  UMS Chamber Arts series concert in St. Francis church in 2001; now it  returns with Swiss recorder virtuoso Maurice Steger, a "wonderfully deft  player, with absolute clarity of note and line, even in the most  virtuosic variations." (Fanfare)
Les Violons du Roy borrows its name from the renowned string orchestra of the court of the French kings. The group, comprised of 15 core members, was assembled in 1984 by music director Bernard Labadie and specializes in the vast repertoire of music for chamber orchestra.
Although the ensemble plays on modern instruments, its approach to the works of the Baroque and Classical periods has been strongly influenced by current research into performance practice in the 17th and early-18th centuries; in this repertoire Les Violons du Roy uses replicates of period bows. The orchestra has been widely acclaimed for its exceptional energy, brilliance, and vitality. In recent seasons, under the leadership of first guest conductor Jean-Marie Zeitouni, the orchestra has begun a more in-depth exploration of 19th- and 20th-century repertoire.
Les Violons du Roy has resided at the Palais Montcalm, the heart of the music scene in Quebec City, since 2007. The orchestra is renowned throughout Canada thanks to numerous concerts and recordings broadcast by Societe Radio-Canada and CBC, and its regular presence at music festivals. Les Violons du Roy first performed in Europe in 1988 and has since given dozens of concerts in France, Germany, England, Spain, and the Netherlands with internationally renowned soloists including Magdalena Kozena, David Daniels, and Vivica Genaux. The orchestra has twice been asked to perform at the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam. It again toured Europe in November 2011 with pianist Alexandre Tharaud. Since its first performance in Washington in 1995, Les Violons du Roy has extended its performance network in the US, making regular stops in New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles, and is now represented by the Opus 3 Artists agency. A recent highlight includes a US tour to both Carnegie Hall in New York and the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles, where the orchestra performed Handel's Messiah and Bach's Christmas Oratorio with La Chapelle de Quebec and an outstanding array of soloists (Rosemary Joshua, David Daniels, Jan Kobow, Andrew Foster- Williams, and Joshua Hopkins).Les Violons du Roy's 22 recordings have earned acclaim, distinctions, and awards at national and international levels. Two of the 12 recordings re­ leased by Dorian (Handel's Apollo e Dafne and Mo­zart's Requiem) have earned Juno Awards. The as­ sociation with Quebec label ATMA has given way to six CDs since 2004, including: Water Music, the 2008 Felix Award-winning album recorded in the Raoul-Jobin Hall; Piazzolla, conducted by Jean-Ma­rie Zeitouni and winner of a Juno Award in 2006; and 2010's Britten, Les Illuminations with soprano Karina Gauvin. The group's first collaboration withthe multinational Virgin Classics label led to the fall 2006 release of a compilation of cantata arias by Handel and Hasse with US mezzo-soprano Vivica Genaux. Two other Virgin Classics releases in 2011 feature C.P.E. Bach's cello concertos with the Nor­wegian cellist Truls Mork and J.S. Bach's keyboard concertos with the French pianist Alexandre Tharaud. The most recent recording, presenting arias by Mozart, Haydn, Gluck, and Graun with the contralto Marie-Nicole Lemieux, was produced for the Naive label. Les Violons du Roy is a proud member of Orchestras Canada, the national asso­ ciation representing Canada's orchestras.

59  Mark Morris Dance Gr
The Washington Post called Mark Morris "our Mozart of modern dance. There is that same sense of easy fecundity, his air of an aging, congenial enfant terrible,  the sheer brilliance and wealth of his choreographic invention." Morris  has changed the way that audiences see modern dance, with unique  artistry that reflects a profound and sophisticated love of music. His  company of exuberant dancers lives up to its reputation of wit, grace,  and a refined musicality that is further reinforced by Morris's use of  live musicians in every performance. Of Socrates, the San Francisco Chronicle  enthused, "What Morris captures is a mood that evolves from jubilant to  resigned. This may be his most elegiac work, and it will always seem  like a special event." The New York Times added, "Socrates, though not simple, is simply beautiful."
ark Morris was born on August 29, 1956, in Seattle, Washington, where he studied with Verla Flowers and PerryBrunssn. He performed with the Koleda Balkan Dance Ensemble, and later the dance companies of Lar Lubovitch, Hannah Kahn, Laura Dean, and Eliot Feld. He formed the Mark Morris Dance Group in 1980, and has since created more than 130 works for the company.From 1988-1991, he was Director of Dance at the Theatre Royal de la Monnaie in Brussels, the national opera house of Belgium. Among the works created during his time there were three evening-length dances: L'Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderate', Dido and Aeneas', and The Hard Nut. In 1990, he founded the White Oak Dance Project with Mikhail Baryshnikov. Mr. Morris is also a ballet choreographer and has created seven works for the San Francisco Ballet since 1994 and received commissions from many others. His work is also in the repertory of the Pacific Northwest Ballet, Boston Ballet, Dutch Na­tional Ballet, New Zealand Ballet, Houston Ballet, English National Ballet, and The Royal Ballet. Mr. Morris is noted for his musicality and has been de­ scribed as "undeviating in his devotion to music." He has worked extensively in opera, directing and choreographing productions for The Metropolitan Opera, New York City Opera, Gotham Chamber Opera, English National Opera, and The Royal Op­era, Covent Garden. In 1991, he was named a Fel­low of the MacArthur Foundation. He has received 11 honorary doctorates to date. In 2006, Mr. Morris received the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs Mayor's Award for Arts and Culture and a WQXR Gramophone Special Rec­ognition Award "for being an American ambas­sador for classical music at home and abroad."He is the subject of a biography, Mark Mor­ris, by Joan Acocella (Farrar, Straus and Giroux) and Marlowe & Company published a volume of photographs and critical essays entitled Mark Morris' L'Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderato: A Cel­ebration. Mr. Morris is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American Philosophical Society. In 2007, he received the Samuel H. Scripps/American Dance Festival life­ time achievement award. In 2010, he received the prestigious Leonard Bernstein Lifetime Achieve­ment Award for the Elevation of Music in Society.
The Mark Morris Dance Group (MMDG) was formed in 1980 and gave its first con­ cert that year in New York City. The compa­ny's touring schedule steadily expanded to include cities both in the US and in Europe, and in 1986 it made its first national television program for the PBS series Dance in America. In 1988, MMDG was invited to become the national dance company of Belgium, and spent three years in residence at the Theatre Royal de la Monnaie in Brussels.The company returned to the US in 1991 as one of the world's leading dance companies, perform­ ing across the country and at major international festivals. Based in Brooklyn, New York, the com­pany has maintained and strengthened its ties to several cities around the world, most notably its West Coast home, Cal Performances in Berkeley, California, and its Midwest home, the Krannert Center for the Performing Arts at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign. MMDG also appears regularly in New York, Boston, Fairfax, and Seattle.MMDG made its debut at the Mostly Mozart Fes­tival in 2002 and at the Tanglewood Music Festival in 2003 and has since been invited to both festivals annually. From the company's many London sea­ sons, it has garnered two Laurence Olivier Awards.MMDG is noted for its commitment to live music, a feature of every performance on its in­ternational touring schedule since 1996. MMDG collaborates with leading orchestras, opera com­panies, and musicians including cellist Yo-Yo Ma in the Emmy Award-winning film Falling Down Stairs (1997); percussionist and composer Zakir Hussain, Mr. Ma, and jazz pianist Ethan Iverson in Kolam (2002); The Bad Plus in Violet Cavern (2004); pianists Emanuel Ax, Garrick Ohlsson, and Yoko Nozaki for Mozart Dances (2006); and with the English National Opera in Four Saints in Three Acts (2000) and King Arthur (2006). MMDG's film and televi­sion projects also include Dido and Aeneas, The Hard Nut, two documentaries for the UK's South Bank Show, and PBS' Live From Lincoln Center. In September 2001, the Mark Morris Dance Center opened in Brooklyn, New York, to provide a home for the company, rehearsal space for the dance community, outreach programs for local children, and a school offering dance classes to students of all ages.

60  Takacs Quartet
Takacs Quartet returns to Ann Arbor for their 16th UMS appearance since 1984.
Recognized as one of the world’s great ensembles, the Takacs Quartet  plays with a unique blend of drama, warmth, and humor, combining four  distinct musical personalities to bring fresh insights to the string  quartet repertoire.
“Every time one is blown away by the rightness and freshness of everything they do,”
Recognized as one of the world's great ensembles, the TAKACS QUARTET plays with a unique blend of drama warmth and humor, combining four distinct musical personalities to bring fresh insights to thestring quartet repertoire.In 2012, Gramophone announced that the Takacs was the only string quartet to be inducted into its first Hall of Fame, along with such legendary artists as Jascha Heifetz, Leonard Bernstein, and Dame Janet Baker. The ensemble also won the 2011 Award for Chamber Music and Song presented by the Royal Philharmonic Society in London. Based in Boulder at the University of Colorado. the Takacs Quartet performs 90 concerts a year worldwide, in North America throughout Europe. as well as inAustralia New Zealand. Japan and South Korea.Appointed in 2012 as the first- ever Associate Artists at Wigmore Hall in London. the Takacs will present six concerts per season there.Other European engagements include performances in the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam. the Musikverein in Vienna and the Musee d’Orsay in Paris.In 2013-2014, the Takacs returns to Japan and Singapore, and will also perform Bart6k Cycles throughout the US, including performances at Ravinia Carnegie Hall Princeton, Kennedy Center, Stanford. UC Berkeley, Boston. and Cleveland. The Quartet recently toured in NorthAmerica with pianists Marc-Andre Hamelin and Garrick Ohlsson. including concerts at New York's Lincoln Center. The Quartet is known for innovativeprogramming. In 2007 with Academy Award-winning actor Philip Seymour Hoffman. it performed Everyman in Carnegie Hall inspired by the Philip Roth novel. The group collaborates regularly with the Hungarian folk ensemble Muzsikas, performing a program that explores the folk sources of Bartok's music.The Takacs performed a music and poetry program on a 14-city US tour with the poet Robert Pinsky.The members of the Takacs Quartet are Christoffersen Faculty Fellows at the University of Colorado Boulder. The Quartet has helped to develop a string program with a special emphasis on chamber music, where students work in a nurturing environment designed to help them develop their artistry.The Quartet's commitment to teaching is enhanced by summer residencies at the Aspen Festival and at the Music Academy of the West, Santa Barbara. The Takacs is a Visiting Quartet at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama London.The Takacs Quartet was formed in 1975 at the Franz Liszt Academy in Budapest by Gabor Takacs-Nagy, Karoly Schranz, Gabor Ormai, and Andras Fejer, while all four were students. It first received international attention in 1977, winning First Prize and the Critics' Prize at the International String Quartet Competition in Evian. France. The Quartet also won the Gold Medal at the 1978 Portsmouth and Bordeaux Competitions and First Prizes at the Budapest International String Quartet Competition in 1978 and the Bratislava Competition in 1981. The Quartet made its North American debut tour in 1982. Violinist Edward Dusinberre joined the Quartet in 1993 and violist Roger Tapping in 1995. Violist Geraldine Walther replaced Mr.Tapping in 2005. In 2001 the Takacs Quartet was awarded the Order of Merit of the Knight's Cross of the Republic of Hungary, and in March 2011 each member of the Quartet was awarded the Order of Merit Commander's Crossby the President of the Republic of Hungary.

61  Ahmad Jamal
Ahmad Jamal is not just a living legend of jazz; he is one of the most inspired and inspiring artists in music today.” (AllAboutJazz.com) A pivotal influence on Miles Davis and countless others, NEA Jazz Master Ahmad Jamal incorporates a unique sense of space in his music — his musical concepts are exciting while confidently understated. Like Louis Armstrong, Jamal is an exemplary ensemble player, someone who listens and responds with total command of the keyboard. His charismatic swing and daringly inventive solos always tell a story. Born in Pittsburgh 81 years ago, Jamal is playing better than ever, with lifetime achievement awards feeling premature given his ongoing desire to push the genre forward. He returns after his UMS debut in 2008 with the ensemble from his 2010 release, A Quiet Time, which features drummer Herlin Riley, who was for many years the drummer in the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra.
Celebrated pianist-composer Ahmad Jamal continues his performance schedule around the world as he has for well over the last four decades. Noted for his outstanding technical command and identifiable sound as a piano styl­ist, Mr. Jamal was born on July 2, 1930, in Pitts­ burgh, Pennsylvania. A child prodigy who began to play the piano at the age of three, he began for­ mal studies at age seven. While in high school, he completed the equivalent of college master classes under the noted African-American concert singer and teacher Mary Cardwell Dawson and pianist James Miller. He joined the musicians' union at the age of 14, and he began touring upon graduation from Westinghouse High School at the age of 17, drawing critical acclaim for his solos. In 1951 he formed his first trio, The Three Strings. Performing at New York's The Embers club, record producer John Hammond "discovered" The Three Strings and signed them to Okeh Records (a division of Columbia, now Sony, Records).
In 1956, Mr. Jamal, who had already been joined by bassist Israel Crosby in 1955, replaced guitarist Ray Crawford with a drummer. Work­ ing as the house trio at Chicago's Pershing Hotel in 1958, drummer Vernell Fournier joined this trio and Mr. Jamal made an on-location recording for Argo (Chess) Records entitled But Not For Me. The resulting hit single and album, which also included "Poinciana"—his rendition, now Mr. Jamal's trade­ mark, remained on the top-10 bestselling charts— amazingly for a jazz album—for an unprecedented 108 weeks. This financial success enabled Mr. Ja­mal to realize a dream, and he opened a restau­rant/club called The Alhambra in Chicago. Here the trio was able to perform while limiting their touring schedule.
Considering his trio an orchestra, Mr. Jamal not only achieves a unified sound, but subtly inserts in­ dependent roles for the bass and drums. The hall­ marks of Mr. Jamal's style are rhythmic innovations, colorful harmonic perceptions, especially left-hand harmonic and melodic figures, plus parallel and contrary motion lines in and out of chordal sub­stitutions and alterations and pedal point ostinato interludes in tasteful dynamics. He also incorpo­rates a unique sense of space in his music, and his musical concepts are exciting without being loud in volume. Augmented by a selection of unusual standards and his own compositions, Mr. Jamal notably impressed and influenced, among others, trumpeter Miles Davis.
In 1951, Mr. Jamal first recorded Ahmad's Blues on Okeh Records. His arrangements of the folk tunes "Billy Boy" and "Poinciana" (not his original composition), also stem from this period. In 1955, he recorded his first Argo (Chess) Records album that included "New Rhumba," "Excerpts From The Blues," "Medley (Actually I Don't Want To Be Kissed)," and "It Ain't Necessarily So"—all later utilized by Miles Davis and Gil Evans on the albums Miles Ahead and Porgy and Bess.
In his autobiography, Mr. Davis praises Mr. Ja­mal's special artistic qualities and cites his influ­ence. In fact, the mid-to-late1950's Miles Davis Quintet recordings notably feature material previ­ously recorded by Mr. Jamal: "Squeeze Me," "It Could Happen To You," "But Not For Me," "Surrey With the Fringe On Top," "Ahmad's Blues," "On Green Dolphin Street," and "Billy Boy."
In 1994, Mr. Jamal received the American Jazz Masters fellowship award from the National Endowment for the Arts. The same year he was named a Duke Ellington Fellow at Yale University, where he performed commissioned works with the Assai String Quartet.
In 1970, Mr. Jamal performed the title com­ position by Johnny Mandel for the soundtrack of the film MASH!, and in 1995, two tracks from his smash album But Not For Me: "Music, Music, Mu­ sic" and "Poinciana" were featured in the Clint Eastwood film The Bridges of Madison County. Hal Leonard Publications issued The Ahmad Jamal Col­lection Piano Transcriptions in 1998.
Mr. Jamal's 1996 release The Essence features a first—a recording made with a horn, tenor saxophonist George Coleman. When released in Europe, the album received critical comments as "Historique!" as well as the resulting outstanding sales and the CHOC Award in France. The album has also received the Django Award, and a concert at the Salle Pleyel in Paris was sold out. In June 2007 the French Government inducted Mr. Jamal into the prestigious Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by French Culture Minister Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, naming him Officier de I'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres.It's Magic, released in June 2008, hit the charts at number 13 immediately after its release in the US, being touted as one of his finest works yet to date. It's Magic is hailed by critics as a career high­ light: it graced the Billboard Top Jazz Albums chart, the iTunes Jazz Top 10, and it recently peaked at number two on the Jazz Week Radio Chart in France. Mr. Jamal was awarded "Best International Album" ("Album International de Production Francaise") by Les Victoires du Jazz, the French version of the Grammy Awards. The album also garnered "Record of the Year" by Jazzman magazine.In July 2010 The Complete Ahmad Jamal Trio Argo Sessions 1956-1962 was released by Mosaic. This compilation was recognized as the best reis­ sue of the year by the French Jazz Academy. Mr. Jamal's latest recording A Quiet Time is the much anticipated follow-up to It's Magic. A Quiet Time, released in January 2010, was the number one jazz album on Jazz Radio for the year 2010. Mr. Jamal's music remains youthful, fresh, imaginative, and always influential.Mr. Jamal is an exclusive Steinway Artist.

62  Goran Bregovic
"It was party time…a Balkan free-for-all, and the jam-packed auditorium went wild…" (The Jerusalem Post) Balkan music icon and acclaimed film composer Goran Bregovic celebrates the music of Europe’s Gypsy tradition. With a 20-piece ensemble consisting of a Serbian Gypsy band, a classical string ensemble, an all-male choir, two Bulgarian female singers, and Bregovic’s own electric guitar, the music blends raucous Gypsy dance tunes with traditional Eastern European choral music, spinning it all through a rock-and-roll cycle.
Roots in the Balkans where he stems from, head in the 21st century which he fully in- habits, Goran Bregovic's music marries the Goran Bregovic sounds of a Gypsy brass band with traditional Bulgarian polyphonies, those of an electric guitar, and traditional percussion with a curious rock accent all against a background of a bedeviled string orchestra and deep sonorities of a male choir, creating music that our soul recognizes instinctively and the body greets with an irresistible urge to dance.Born in Sarajevo of a Serbian mother and a Croatian father, after a few years of violin studies Goran formed his first group, the White Button, at the age of 16. Composer and guitar player, he admitted his immoderate love for rock 'n' roll. "In those times, rock had a capital role in our lives. It was just about the only way we could make our voices heard, and publicly express our discontent without risking jail."Studies in philosophy and sociology would most certainly have landed him a position teaching Marxist thought, had the gigantic success of his first record not decided otherwise. There followed 15 years with the White Button, marked by marathon tours. At the end of the 1980s, Mr. Bregovic took time away from his hectic schedule to compose music for Emir Kusturica's film Times of the Gypsies, and to make his childhood dream come true: to live in a small house on the Adriatic coast. The war in Yugoslavia shattered this, and many other dreams, and Mr. Bregovic had to abandon everything for exile in Paris.Coming from the same background, the same generation, and survivors of the same experiences, Mr. Bregovic and Mr. Kusturica formed a team that didn't need words to communicate. After Times of the Gypsies, Mr. Bregovic composed the origi- nal soundtrack tor Arizona Dream (1993). His next film project was Patrice Chereau's La Reine Mar- got, winner of a Palme d'Or at the 1994 Cannes Film Festival. Mr. Bregovic has since devoted him- self to his own music projects and a second stage career without completely abandoning film, however. Over 10 years after he abandoned pure rock in 1985, Mr. Bregovic's music had never been per- formed live. This all changed in 1995 when, with a band of 10 traditional musicians, a choir of 50 singers, and a symphony orchestra, he undertook a series of mega-concerts in Greece and Sweden followed by a concert given at the Forest National of Brussels for an audience of 7,500. A later concert at the Piazza St. Giovanni in Rome in front of 500,000 people confirmed beyond any doubt that his music achieved an impact on the international level.In 2009, the first part of the CD Alkohol, recorded live in Guca in the summer of 2007, was released in Europe and in North America. Guca is a small town in Serbia of approximately 20,000 inhabitants that holds an annual contest of brass bands each August when its population swells to 150,000. The remainder of 2009 included Mr. Bregovic's first extensive North American tour and a piece composed for Bang on a Can which had its premiere at Lincoln Center.Goran Bregovic's new album Champagne for Gypsies, due to be released in North America in 2012, is a reaction to the extreme pressures that Gypsies (Roma) have been experiencing lately across Europe. His latest project serves as a re- minder of some of the world's favorite musicians who have left a trace in popular culture around the globe.

63  Cloud Gate Dance The
The virtuosity of the dancers from the Taiwanese company Cloud Gate has caused critics to rave that they "possess a control and articulation that verge on the superhuman." (Chicago Sun-Times) Trained in tai chi, meditation, Chinese opera movement, modern dance, and ballet, the company performs a rich repertoire with roots in Asian myths, folklore, and aesthetics, all infused with a contemporary perspective. For this long-awaited UMS debut, Cloud Gate presents Lin Hwai-min’s newest work, Water Stains on the Wall. The white set looks like a blank piece of rice paper traditionally used by Chinese calligraphers and painters, onto which images of drifting clouds in different degrees of blackness are projected, with dancers grounded on a tilted floor yet appearing to float. They look like flowing ink, creating exquisite spaces that are constantly shifting, reminding one of Chinese classical landscape painting. Luxuriating in the sheer joy of movement, these remarkably fluid performers make stillness every bit as breathtaking as action. "Water stains on the wall" is a popular metaphor that represents the highest state in the aesthetics of Chinese calligraphy. Hwai-min and dancers take off from this metaphor and create an abstract work of beauty and magic that stands sublimely on its own.
According to legend, Cloud Gate is the name of the oldest known dance in China, a ritual dance of some 5,000 years ago. In 1973, choreographer Lin Hwai-min adopted this classical name for the first contemporary dance company in any Chinese-speaking community: Cloud Gate Dance Theatre of Taiwan.Cloud Gate's rich repertoire has its roots in Asian myths, folklore, and aesthetics, but it brings to these age-old beliefs and stories a contempo­rary and universal perspective. The company is made up of two dozen dancers whose training in­cludes chi kung, meditation, internal martial arts, modern dance, ballet, and calligraphy.Cloud Gate has been on extensive overseas tours throughout the continents of Europe, Asia, Austra­lia, North America, and South America, including engagements at New York's Next Wave Festival, the Sydney 2000 Olympic Arts Festival, Lyon Biennale de la Danse, Melbourne International Arts Festival, Adelaide Festival, Berlin Festival, Moscow Chekhov International Theatre Festival, Sadler's Wells Theatre and Barbican Centre in London, Deutsche Oper Berlin, the Kennedy Center, and Internationales Tanzfest NRW directed by Pina Bausch.In 2003, Cloud Gate opened the Melbourne International Arts Festival with Cursive II, win­ning both the Age Critics' Award and the Patrons' Award; while in New York, Moon Water was named the best dance of the year by the New York Times. In 2006, Cursive: A Trilogy was chosen as the best dance choreography of the year as a re­sult of critics' poll by Ballet-Tanz and Theaterheute.At home, Cloud Gate also enjoys high acclaim and popularity. It performs throughout Taiwan, in venues ranging from the lavish National Theater in Taipei to mid-sized cultural centers in various cities. The company also gives free outdoor performanc­es several times a year, drawing audiences of up to 60,000 per performance.To further tour campuses and grass-roots com­munities and to foster young choreographers in Tai­ wan, Cloud Gate 2 was founded in 1999. In 1998, Cloud Gate Dance School was founded to bring the joy of dance to students, from ages four to 84.In 2003, in recognition of Cloud Gate's contri­bution to the cultural life of Taipei City, the Tai­pei City Government proclaimed August 21—the opening day of Cloud Gate's 30th anniversary season—as "Cloud Gate Day" and named Fu-Hs- ing North Road Lane 231, home of Cloud Gate's office, as "Cloud Gate Lane." This was the first time Taiwan bestowed the honor of naming a day and place after a living artist and/or artistic group. In 2010, a new asteroid, numbered 200025 dis­ covered by Taiwan's Lulin Observatory of National Central University in 2007, was officially named after Cloud Gate. Most of Cloud Gate's productions have been made into videos. Among them, Songs of the Wan­ derers, Moon Water, Bamboo Dream, and Cursive II were filmed in Europe. They have been broadcast in many countries and are available on DVD.

64  Diego El Cigala
Flamenco has to be suffered,” Diego El Cigala asserted in a New York Times interview. “How do you convey emotions from within your heart if you don’t know what suffering is? If there is no evidence of pain in your heart, there is no song.” Nicknamed “El Cigala” (Norway Lobster) for his thin frame and strong voice, Diego is an internationally celebrated Gitano flamenco singer and contemporary flamenco’s most compelling voice. His mother and father were both accomplished practitioners of flamenco, as were his grandparents. He started off singing for well-known flamenco dancers but has since “moved to the front,” which in flamenco slang means to sing on one’s own instead of accompanying a dancer. He is noted for being a pioneer in fusing flamenco with other Latin American music forms such as the bolero, Afro-Caribbean jazz, and tango. His latest project, Cigala & Tango, is the musical testimony to his concert at the legendary Teatro Gran Rex in Buenos Aires last April. The legendary Paco de Lucía says, “Diego has one of the most beautiful flamenco voices of our time, a voice of sweetness that flows over everything. When I listen to him, it warms my heart.” The New York Times adds, “He radiates a magnetic mix of winking charm and unpredictable vitriol reminiscent of a singer from an entirely different milieu, Frank Sinatra.”
Ramon Jimenez Salazar is the name shown on Diego El Cigala's passport. Diego's name is the result of a family dispute while with a breathtaking live show. In 2002, El Cigala conquered one of the most coveted stages: the Teatro Real in Madrid. The recordings of this con­ cert, which included a collaboration with Nino Josele, became a monumental flamenco manifesto from this Madrilian singer.at the baptismal font. "El Cigala" was a name given to him by the Losada brothers—and not by Camaron, as it is often said—during one of their first tours.Diego El Cigala's first taste of international suc­cess came in 2003 with the release of Lagrimas Negras, the album that united Diego with Bebo Valdes on piano. At the end of 2004, the album had sold more than 700,000 copies around the world, by 2008 more than one million. Diego was born in the cold month of Decem­ber 1968, on Provisiones Street near the famous Madrilian fleet market "El Rastro." His mother, Au­ rora Salazar Motos, sister of the great musician Rafael Farina from the Spanish city of Salamanca, did not pursue a professional career as a singer but she touched those who listened to her flamenco echo. His Andalusian father, Jose de Cordoba, made a living at popular tablaos (flamenco clubs) such as Torres Bermejas, El Corral de la Pacheca, and Arco de Cuchilleros.The Ondas Award became the first of many awards for Diego including remarkable ones such as Microfono de Oro, five Amigo Awards and five Latin Grammy Award nominations. Prior to this recognition, The New York Times music critic, Ben Ratliff, selected Lagrimas Negras as the "2003 Al­ bum of the Year."Young Diego spent his time running after a football but whenever he would hear someone singing, he would drop everything just to listen. Barely 12 years old, he won the Certamen Flamen­ co Joven de Getafe (a flamenco competition in Madrid for young singers) as well as an award on the Spanish TV show Gente Joven. Soon after, he started to sing for well-known flamenco dancers such as Cristobal Reyes, Mario Maya, Manolete, Farruco, Manuel Camacho, and El Quito. Musi­ cians such as Camaron, Tomatito, Gerardo Nunez, and Vicente Amigo have relied on his collaboration for their recordings.In 2005, Diego decided to return to flamenco paying homage to one of the greatest painters of all times, Pablo Ruiz Picasso. In this CD, musicians such as Paco de Lucia, Tomatito, Raimundo Annador, Josemi Carmona, and Jerry Gonzalez contrib­ uted their sound to lyrics that range from the clas­sic "Se equivoco la paloma" by Rafael Albeiti to other tunes by contemporary composers such as Javier Rubial, Javier Krahe, or Carlos Chaouen. Picasso en mis ojos became "Disco de Oro" in Spain and also in Venezuela.In 1997, Diego began his solo career with the album Undebel, produced by David Amaya. This album featured guitarists Anton Jimenez, David Amaya, Paquete, and Tomatito. In 2000, his sec­ond album Entre vareta y canasta was released by 18 Chulos, a record label owned by the artists Wy­ oming, Santiago Segura, and Faemino y Cansado. It was Wyoming who introduced Diego to Fernan­ do Trueba (a prominent Spanish film director) who was interested in listening to the CD and ended up filming the music video of the album's first single.In 2006, Cigala hit the shelves, a compila­tion of Diego's work in five CDs. He also shared the stage with Salif Keita, considered the golden voice of African music, at the Biennial Festival of Seville. The occasion confirmed Diego's capacity to adapt his style to great traditional music. That same year, he became the new main attraction at the Latin Grammy Awards ceremony receiving the award for "Best Flamenco Album" for Picasso en mis ojos, as well the award for "Best Long Form Music Video" for "Blanco y Negro," directed by Fernando Trueba for the album Lagrimas Negras.A year later, Diego released Corren tiempos de alegria, a collaboration with some of the jazz musicians who participated in the film Calle 54 by Trueba. Among them, two artists would mark his career: Bebo Valdes and Jerry Gonzalez. The album was nominated for a Latin Grammy for "Best Fla­menco Album."With Jerry Gonzalez, Diego recorded the al­ bum Piratas del flamenco and during that year, they both toured throughout Mexico and Spain

65  AnDa Union
Formed in 2003, AnDa Union is part of a musical movement that is finding inspiration in old and forgotten folk music from the nomadic herdsman cultures of Inner and Outer Mongolia, drawing on a repertoire of music that all but disappeared during China’s recent tumultuous past. The group’s 14 members all hail from the Xilingol Grassland area of Inner Mongolia, a semi-autonomous region of China. They describe themselves as “music gatherers” who dig deep into Mongol traditions to unearth forgotten music — music as it might have been played late into the evening in the camps of Genghis Khan. Its members are accomplished singers and instrumentalists, performing on the traditional horse-head fiddle (tsuur), a three-holed flute (maodun chaoer) as well as Mongolian versions of the dulcimer, zither, lute, and mouth harp. The main singing style is khoomii, commonly referred to as throat singing, a traditional type of Mongolian overtone singing that replicates the sound of nature. The performance will be preceded on November 8 by a captivating documentary film that follows the group on a journey through the vibrant capital of Hohhot and the wild and varied landscapes of the Inner Mongolian grasslands and mountains, where they discover the secrets of their haunting and beautiful music. While wholeheartedly embracing modern society in all its facets, the Mongolian people are a culture fighting for survival in an increasingly industrialized world.
Anda means a blood brother or sister. For Mongolians an "Anda" is more important than a birth brother as you choose a person to become an Anda, a lifelong blood brother. AnDa Union is a brotherhood of Andas.The members of AnDa Union all took up mu- sic from an early age with a passion for traditional Mongolian music, most of them coming from musical families. They are part of a musical movement that is finding inspiration in old and forgotten songs, drawing on a repertoire of magical music that had all but disappeared during China's recent tumultuous past. As a group they hold on to the essence of Mongolian music while creating a form of music that is new. Traditionally music would be played in the Mongol Ger (Yurt) or in the Grass- lands and would be informal, with the styles and instruments varying across the vast Inner Mongolian plains. AnDa Union combines a wide range of this diverse music into a unique feast of accessible Mongolian music.Mongols have a strong musical tradition that is passed from generation to generation. The morin huur, or horse-head fiddle, pays homage to the most important animal in the Mongol culture; almost all houses have a morin huur hanging in the hallway.As the youngest of his seven siblings, Otgonbayar's father showed him old ways of playing and carved a horse-head fiddle for him to practice. Nars's grandfather, a nomadic herder and virtuoso musician, was his inspiration and his first teacher. At the music academy in Chifeng where many members of the group studied, they stood out for their musical dedication and annoyed fellow students with their obsessive morin huur practice. In the capital city of Hohhot they became part of the Inner Mongolia National Song and Dance Troupe and there they discovered other young Mongols who shared the same musical passion and ideals. In 2001, AnDa Union was formed and a unique styled of Mongolian music was born.Nars, the group's leader, says, "Our music draws from all the Mongol tribes that Genghis Khan [more properly known as Chinggis Khan], unified. We all have different ethnic backgrounds and we bring these influences into our music. There is a wealth of folk music for us to learn, so far our repertoire of songs is like a drop in the ocean." The group describes themselves as music gatherers, digging deep into Mongol traditions and un- earthing forgotten music. They are on a mission to stimulate their culture and re-engage young Mongols, many of whom no longer speak their own language. Saikhannakhaa is fighting to reverse this trend by opening a bar in the capital Hohhot, where she will promote music, "I found an old golden wheel with half its spokes broken in an old dusty shop. It looks like a wheel that once turned the warrior carts of the great Mongol armies. I will hang this wheel in my bar as a warning to Mongolian people that our culture is broken and needs to be mended." Hadanbaatar, the drummer adds, "young Mongolians like us now understand how important our culture is but maybe the next generation won't care and we have to prevent this from happening."AnDa Union are fluent in singing and play many instruments including the morin huur, the maodun chaoer (a three-holed flute), as well as Mongolian versions of the lute, and mouth harp. Although Mongolians are a race of musicians, the pseudo-folk music promoted in nationally run theaters and auditoriums in Inner Mongolia is far from the long song and horse-head fiddle coming from the Grasslands. AnDa Union is bound by a mission to promote the essence of this music to the world. "Most of the band members have been playing together since childhood," remarks Nars. "As adults, we studied professional vocals and instruments together. We are like a family. Ten years ago, AnDa Union was forged and we haven't looked back."

66  A Night in Treme
The Treme (pronounced truh-MAY) neighborhood of New Orleans has been a source of African-American music and culture for as long as cooks in the Crescent City have been serving red beans and rice on Monday nights. Birthplace of the great New Orleans brass band tradition and one of the first black neighborhoods in America, Treme is the heartbeat of New Orleans and home to Congo Square. This concert features the Rebirth Brass Band, known for combining traditional brass band sound with funk, jazz, soul, and hip hop and for embracing the quintessential New Orleans art form “second line,” whereby the band is followed by jubilant dancing. In addition to being a pillar of the New Orleans music scene, the Rebirth Brass Band was featured in the opening scene and on the Grammy nominated soundtrack of David Simon’s hit HBO show "Treme," which follows a group of New Orleaneans who are rebuilding their lives after Hurricane Katrina. The concert takes place in conjunction with the HBO show’s second season. Donald Harrison, Jr., Christian Scott, Glen David Andrews, and Dr. Michael White join the Rebirth Brass Band in this personal celebration of New Orleans music and heritage.
Rebirth Brass Band was the natural choice to serve as the house band for A Night in Treme. With roots firmly planted in centuries of Afro-Caribbean rhythms, no one pumps the Crescent City's musical lifeblood quite like Rebirth. Just as The Dirty Dozen played at The Glass House, a now vanished club where the Dozens fomented a new generation of funk-loving brass bands every Thursday night, the heart of Tuesday night in New Orleans belongs to Rebirth at the Maple Leaf Bar. The sound is equal parts bebop cutting session and hard-grooving dance party as rabid 'birthers soak up soaring trumpet runs that boomerang off the pressed-tin ceiling and bass drum and tuba solos that rumble into the street. The band's new CD, Rebirth of New Orleans, commingles second-line swing, hip-hop-influenced funk and all the kinetic energy of a daylong parade. It's classic Rebirth, constructed on one unruly groove at a time: tenor saxophonist Vincent Broussard and trombonist Corey Henry hold up the mid-range while Derrick Shezbie carries the melody on trumpet as snare drummer Derrick Tabb supplies the syncopated thrust. Add the matchless Frazier brothers Phil on sousaphone, and Keith on bass drum to the mix and Rebirth are conversing in an ancient language from southern Africa. Their mantra since 1983 has been "Lord, You Sure Been Good to Me," and never more so than after Katrina. "Rebirth has reshuffled the cards," Donald Harrison says. "They've revitalized our tradition in ways that are fresh and new."

67  Sweet Honey In The R
Sweet Honey In The Rock focuses on music that challenges, inspires, teaches, encourages, and empowers audiences from all walks of life to become interested and involved in issues that are central to their lives. For over three decades, Sweet Honey In The Rock has celebrated our collective humanity, singing about the challenging issues of racism; social, economic, and environmental injustice; equal rights; and the greed that seems to be pulling our nation apart. The group has built a distinguished legacy as one of the most celebrated ambassadors ofa cappella music, fusing five scintillating and soulful voices with the texture, harmonic blend, and raw quality that is indigenous and true to authentic a cappella music. They take audiences on journeys that span centuries of African-American history and culture — sound journeys that nurture and heal. In the tradition of artists in action — this is the group that sang at the rally when the University of Michigan defended its affirmative action position before the Supreme Court — Sweet Honey taps the spirit, encourages audiences to think, asks them to reflect, and inspires them to make a difference in their communities. Sign language interpreted.
Founded by Bernice Johnson Reagon in 1973 (with Mie, Carol Maillard, and Louise Robinson) at the DC Black Repertory Theater Company, Sweet Honey In The Rock®, the internationally renowned a cappella ensemble, has been a vital and innovative presence in the music culture of Washington, DC and in communities of conscience around the world.
From Psalm 81:16 comes the promise to a people of being fed by honey out of the rock. Honey an ancient substance, sweet and nurturing. Rock an elemental strength, enduring the winds of time. The metaphor of sweet honey in the rock captures completely these African-American women whose repertoire is steeped in the sacred music of the Black church, the clarion calls of the Civil Rights Movement, and songs of the struggle for justice everywhere.
Rooted in a deep commitment to create music out of the rich textures of African-American legacy and traditions, Sweet Honey In The Rock possesses a stunning vocal prowess that captures the complex sounds of blues, spirituals, traditional gospel hymns, rap, reggae, African chants, hip- hop, ancient lullabies, and jazz improvisation. Sweet Honey's collective voice, occasionally accompanied by hand-percussion instruments, produces a sound filled with soulful harmonies and intricate rhythms.
In the best and in the hardest of times, Sweet Honey In The Rock has come in song to communities across the US and around the world, raising her voice in hope, love, justice, peace, and resistance. Sweet Honey invites her audiences to open their minds and hearts and to think about who we are and how we treat each other, our fellow creatures who share this planet, and, of course, the planet itself.
Sweet Honey's 20th CD release, Experience... 101 was a 2008 Grammy Award nominee. The excitement continued as Sweet Honey was asked to compose new material in celebration of the Alvin Alley Dance Theater's 50th anniversary. Together, these two artistic treasures 1973 (with Mie, Carol Maillard, and Louise of the African-American experience performed this Robinson) at the DC Black Repertory Theater once-in-a-lifetime collaboration throughout the US.The music for the collaboration was released on a CD entitled GO IN GRACE.
In 2009, Sweet Honey was honored to accept an invitation from President and Mrs. Barack Obama to give a concert at the White House. 2010 saw the release of a single CD and video in response to Arizona Law SB-1070, and the creation of a tribute concert, "Remembering Nina, Odetta, and Miriam Makeba."

68  Jazz at Lincoln Cent
Performing music that links today’s improvisers with the rich history of traditional and contemporary big-band composition, Wynton Marsalis’s Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra brings an expansive range of music to the most treasured international stages. Despite one of the most aggressive touring schedules in the business, JLCO makes each concert fresh, drawing in audiences who are continually energized and amazed by the group’s depth of outrageous talent.
The Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra with Wynton Marsalis is so far from the usual big-band cliché that it’s mind-blowing.” (Dallas) Since 1988, Wynton Marsalis has led the 15-piece Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra, which simultaneously honors the rich heritage of Duke Ellington and Louis Armstrong while presenting a stunning variety of new works from illustrious names, many of whom perform regularly with the ensemble. From swinging to supple, sophisticated to spirited, it’s all sheer jazz perfection — and no wonder these annual appearances have become a favorite of UMS audiences. “You know it’s a good gig when you can’t tell if the band or the audience is having more fun.”
The JAZZ AT LINCOLN CENTER ORCHESTRA comprising 15 of the finest jazz soloists and ensemble players today, has been the Jazz at Lincoln Center resident orchestra since 1988. Featured in all aspects of Jazz at Lincoln Center's programming. this remarkably versatile orchestra performs and leads educational events in New York, across the US, and around the globe; in concert halls, dance venues, jazz dubs. and public parks; and with symphony orchestras. ballet troupes, local students, and an ever-expanding roster of guest artists.
Under Music Director Wynton Marsalis, the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra spends over a third of the year on tour . The big band performs a vast repertoire, from rare historic compositions to Jazz at Lincoln Center-commissioned works, including compositions and arrangements by Duke Ellington. Count Basie, Fletcher Henderson. Thelonious Monk. Mary Lou Williams. Billy Strayhorn. Dizzy Gillespie, Benny Goodman. and Charles Mingus. Guest conductors have included Benny Carter, John Lewis. Jimmy Heath. Chico O'Farrill. Paquito D'Rivera Jon Faddis. Robert Sadin. David Berger, and Gerald Wilson.
Over the last few years. the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra has performed collaborations with many of the world's leading symphony orchestras. including the New York Philharmonic. the Russian National Orchestra. the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra. the Boston, Chicago, and London Symphony Orchestras, and the Orchestra Esperimentale in Sao Paolo, Brazil. The JLCO has also been featured in several education and performance residencies in the last few years, including those in France. Italy, Czech Republic. England, Switzerland. Germany, Brazil and Japan.

69  The Andersen Project
"Filled to the brim with his trademark humor and visual and technological brilliance, this off-the-wall masterpiece by Canadian theater visionary Robert Lepage stars Yves Jacques (Far Side of the Moon) in a one-man tour-de-force about a Canadian writer from the rock-and-roll milieu who is unexpectedly commissioned by the Opera Garnier in Paris to write a libretto for a children’s opera. Arriving in Paris, he finds that his living quarters for the next three months, which he acquired through an apartment swap with a friend, are in a building that is also home to a peep show in the city’s red light district. Freely inspired by the timeless fables written by Hans Christian Andersen who, as it turns out, didn’t really like children, as well as anecdotes from his personal diaries, The Andersen Projectkeenly explores unraveling relationships, personal demons, the thirst for recognition, and compromise that comes too late. The piece was commissioned by the Danish government in 2005 to mark the bicentennial of the birth of that country’s most beloved writer. “A theatrical conjurer, whose dazzling shows have captivated audiences around the world with their mixture of storytelling and stunning imagery." (Guardian, London, on Robert Lepage)
Content appropriate for mature audiences only. Performed in English and French (with projected titles). A strobe light is used in this performance.

70  From Cass Corridor
Every city has had a Golden Age. In most places, the Golden Age dies, but in Detroit it remains unbroken through many different forms, from Jazz to Motown to techno and hip-hop.
On Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, UMS and the U-M MLK Day Symposium celebrate the very unique relationship of the city of Detroit to the music it helped create and shape. Beginning with trumpeter and educator Gerald Wilson (a Cass Technical High School graduate) and continuing through the great Detroit artists and mentors who have sustained the music through the second half of the 20th century, Detroit continues to nurture and create international trends in contemporary music-making and songwriting. With world-renowned jazz pianist and Detroit native Geri Allen serving as music director and the D3 trio serving as house band, From Cass Corridor to the Worldmusically narrates this spectacular and unique journey with celebrated Detroit artists.

71  JLCO with Wynton
The JAZZ AT LINCOLN CENTER ORCHESTRA (JLCO), comprising 15 of the finest jazz soloists and ensemble players today, has been the Jazz at Lincoln Center resident orchestra since 1988. Featured in all aspects of Jazz at Lincoln Center’s programming, this remarkably versatile orchestra performs and leads educational events in New York, across the US, and around the globe; in concert halls, dance venues, jazz clubs, and public parks; and with symphony orchestras, ballet troupes, local students, and an everexpanding roster of guest artists. Education is a major part of Jazz at Lincoln Center’s mission and its educational activities are coordinated with concert and Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra tour programming. These programs, many of which feature Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra members, include the celebrated Jazz for Young People concert series, the Essentially Ellington High School Jazz Band Competition and Festival, the Jazz for Young People Curriculum, and educational residencies, workshops, and concerts for both students and adults worldwide. Jazz at Lincoln Center educational programs reach over 110,000 students, teachers, and general audience members. Under Music Director Wynton Marsalis, the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra spends over a third of the year on tour. The big band performs a vast repertoire, from rare historic compositions to Jazz at Lincoln Centercommissioned works, including compositions and arrangements by Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Fletcher Henderson, Thelonious Monk, Mary Lou Williams, Billy Strayhorn, Dizzy Gillespie, Benny Goodman, and Charles Mingus. Guest conductors have included Benny Carter, John Lewis, Jimmy Heath, Chico O’Farrill, Paquito D’Rivera, Jon Faddis, Robert Sadin, David Berger, and Gerald Wilson. Over the last few years, the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra has performed collaborations with many of the world’s leading symphony orchestras; including the New York Philharmonic; the Russian National Orchestra; the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra; the Boston, Chicago, and London Symphony Orchestra; and the Orchestra Esperimentale in São Paolo, Brazil. The JLCO has also been featured in several education and performance residencies in the last few years, including those in France, Italy, Czech Republic, England, Switzerland, Germany, Brazil, and Japan. Television broadcasts of Jazz at Lincoln Center programs have helped broaden the awareness of its unique efforts in the music. Jazz at Lincoln Center has appeared on several XM Satellite Radio live broadcasts and eight Live From Lincoln Center broadcasts, carried by PBS stations nationwide; including a program which aired on October 18, 2004 during the grand opening of Jazz at Lincoln Center’s home, Frederick P. Rose Hall, and in September 2005 during Jazz at Lincoln Center’s Higher Ground Benefit Concert. To date, 14 recordings featuring the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra with Wynton Marsalis have been released and internationally distributed, the most recent of which being Vitoria Suite (2010), Portrait in Seven Shades (2010), and Congo Square (2007).

72  Angelique Kidjo
“I am a witness of my time,” says Angélique Kidjo, a bona fide world music superstar and activist from Benin who makes her UMS debut with this performance. “When your history is not written, you count on traditional singers to tell you who you are and what is going on in your society. That is what I do with my music.” With James Brown, Jimi Hendrix, Miriam Makeba, and Carlos Santana credited as influences, she brings a passion to her art that is filled with her amazing spirit and experiences from her life’s incredible journey. Angélique Kidjo is a UNICEF and Oxfam Goodwill Ambassador, has her own charitable organization dedicated to supporting the education of young girls in Africa, and passionately campaigns for women’s health in Africa. In 2011 she performed at the Nobel Peace Prize ceremony and concert and was named by The Guardian as one of the Top 100 most inspiring women in the world. A riveting performer, “[Kidjo’s] supercharged pipes have never sounded better, her irresistible energy and joie de vivre never more palpable.”
Beninese singer ANGELIQUE KIDJO is one of the greatest forces in African music today. She is renowned for high- energy performances and a dynamic. uplifting style that fuses the music of her homeland with Western influences. The Guardian has listed her as one of the -Top 100 Most Inspiring Women in the World" Forbes includes her in their list of "Africa's 40 Most Powerful Celebrities," and the BBC places her among "Africa's Most Iconic Figures: She was recently the recipient of the UN's prestigious "Champion of the Earth" award and was honored by the French government with the Insignia of the Order of Arts and Letters.To date. Ms. Kidjo has released 12 albums including the Grammy A ward-winning Djin Ojin. PBS recently premiered the highly anticipated Angelique Kidjo and Friends: Spirit lOsing, a 90-minute live concert special and CDjDVD taped at the WGBH Studios. The resulting I6-track album features special guests Josh Groban. Dianne Reeves, Branford Marsalis, Richard Bona and Ezra Koenig (Vampire Weekend). Spirit lOsing showcases Ms. Kidjo's breathtaking voice and exuberant spirit that can only be fully appreciated during one of hermagical live performances.

73  Amjad Ali Khan
“Amjad Ali Khan may be a master of the sarod rather than the guitar, but once he had built up to the crescendo of his solo set — improvising furiously around the melody line with repeated, rapid-fire playing and then letting his equally frantic tabla player take over — it was easy to see why great Indian music can be as exciting as classic blues and rock.” (The Guardian)
UMS welcomes sarod master Amjad Ali Khan for his UMS debut appearance this season. The sarod is smaller than the sitar and sits in the player’s lap. Its metal fingerboard has no frets and is played with the tips of the fingernails.
Amjad Ali Khan was only six years old when he gave his first sarod recital. After his debut, the career of this musical legend took off, and the Indian classical music scene was witness to regular and scintillating bursts of Raga supernovas. He was born to the illustrious Bangash lineage rooted in the Senia Bangash School and studied with his father and guru, the great Haafiz Ali Khan. Today he shoulders the sixth generation inheritance of this legendary lineage — and his sons, who perform with him, belong to the seventh generation.
After his debut, the career graph of Amjad Ali Khan, a musical legend, took the speed of light. and on its way the Indian classical music scene witnessed regular and scintillating bursts of raga supernovas. Mr. Khan is one of the few maestro who considers his audience to be the soul of his motivation. As he once said, 'There is no essential difference between classical and   music. Music is music. I want to communicate with the listener who finds Indian classical music remote."He is a recipient of the UNESa) Award Padma Vibhushan (Highest Indian civilian award}. UNICEF’s National Ambassadorship. The Crystal A ward by the World Economic Forum. Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters by the French Government and the Fukuoka Cultural Grand Prize in Japan. He has collaborated with the Hong Kong Philharmonic Orchestra The Scottish Chamber Orchestra and the Taipei Chinese Orchestra and is also a Grammy Award nominee in the "Best Traditional World Music Album" category for his album Ancient Sounds. He has been a regular performer at Carnegie Hall Royal Albert Hall Royal Festival Hall, Kennedy Center, Santury Hall, House of Commons. Theatre de 1a Ville, Chicago Symphony Center, Palais Beaux-Arts, Mozart Hall in Frankfurt St. James Palace in the UK. and the Sydney Opera House. Mr. Khan brought his teaching philosophy to Stanford University last year in a residency titled Indian Classical Music: A Way of Life.

74  Hamid Al-Saadi
When Iraqi heritage meets American jazz you get something “hypnotic and utterly unique.” Hamid Al-Saadi is a master of the centuries-old tradition of Iraqi maqam, a system of melodic modes in traditional Arabic instrumental and vocal music. He is the only living performer who has mastered all of the compositions of the maqam repertoire. Due to its intricate details, variations, and highly demanding vocal techniques, very few performers master the entire repertoire.
Amir ElSaffar, an Iraqi-American trumpeter, santur player, vocalist, and composer, has distinguished himself with a mastery of disparate musical styles and a singular approach to combining aspects of Middle Eastern music with American jazz, extending the boundaries of each tradition. In 2002, he put his New York jazz career on hold to immerse himself in the music of his father’s ancestral past, the Iraqi maqam, and has made innovative strides in creating a language that reconciles and combines the aesthetics and techniques of jazz and Middle Eastern music.Two Rivers was commissioned by Vijay Iyer, Cecil Taylor, and Daniel Barenboim as a suite that invokes Iraqi musical traditions framed in a modern jazz setting. The resultant sound is new and fresh, differing considerably from other contemporary cross-cultural musical fusions.
This double-bill performance brings together the traditional and the ever-evolving. “If we want to preserve a tradition, the best way to preserve it is to let it evolve.”
Through his powerful and highly ornamented voice, and in his comprehensive knowledge of the intricate details of the music and poetry of Iraq, generations and layers of the maqam tradition resonate through HAMID AL· SAADI 'S magnificent presence on stage. The only person in his generation to have memorized and mastered all 56 maqamat from the Baghdad repertoire, Mr. Al-Saadi is one of the few vocalists who is keeping the maqam alive today, at a time when so many elements of this profound tradition are in danger of extinction.Born in Iraq in 1958 Hamid Al-Saadi's artistic, musical, and scholarly journey with the Iraqi maqam began from childhood, inspired by his avid love of the Iraqi and Baghdadi culture, the Arabic language, music, and poetry. He studied, practiced. and performed the maqam until he became one of the more renowned and highly acclaimed musicians and scholars in this subject. He learned the art of singing and performing the Iraqi maqam from the legendary Yusuf Omar (1918-1987), who pronounced Hamid Al- Saadi as his successor. Muhammed Al-Gubbenchi (1901-1989), who taught Yusuf Omar and was probably the most influential maqam reciter in history, said that he considered Mr. Al-Saadi to be the"ideal link to pass on the maqam to future generations.' Hamid Al-Saadi immigrated to Great Britain in 1999, where he lived for six years and was active as a maqam scholar, singer, artist, and writer, and returned to Baghdad in 2004, where he currently resides. He authored a book on the maqam, al-maqam wo buhoor al-angham, widely considered one of the most comprehensive texts on the Iraqi maqam and its poetry that has ever been published.This historic US tour begins in New York City, at Columbia University's Miller Theatre, and continues with performances in Washington DC, Chicago, and Ann Arbor.The current tour marks Mr.Al-Saadi's first tour of the US with his group. al-Chalghi al-Baghdadi. including master joza player Dakhil Ahmed and percussionist Sabah Kadhem from Iraq, and Amir ElSaffar on santur.

75  Esperanza Spalding
The 2011 Grammy winner for Best New Artist will demonstrate the power of song and how it can influence our lives.
With her ample talent and beauty, singer, bassist, and composer Esperanza Spalding instantly found herself ranked among the darlings of jazz despite — or perhaps because of — her unusual background. At 15 she left high school and, armed with a GED, entered Portland State University to study music. By age 20, she was one of the youngest faculty members in the history of the Berklee College of Music. At 26, she captured the world’s attention when she was awarded the 2010 Grammy for Best New Artist, the first time the award had gone to a jazz musician in 35 years. After wowing us as a member of Joe Lovano’s “Us Five” Quintet in 2007, she returns with her new album,Radio Music Society, which explores song forms and melodies that are formatted as “pop” songs. “Whether exploding into vocalese or making her bass solo sound like a horn, she’s a spark plug who dances as she grooves through a funked-up and rocked-out repertoire.”
From the beginning of her life to her current success as a creative musician, ESPERANZA SPALDING has charted her own course. The young bassist, vocalist, and composer was one of the biggest breakout stars of 2011 - not just in jazz. but in all genres of music. Her receipt of the 2011 Grammy Award for "Best New Artist" was unprecedented - the first time a jazz musician had won the award - but Ms. Spalding continues to make the unprecedented the norm.Born in Portland. Oregon, Ms. Spalding grew up in a single-parent home and learned early lessons in the meaning of perseverance and moral character from the role model whom she holds in the highest regard to this day - her mother. But even with a rock- solid role model school did not come easy to Ms. Spalding. although not for any lack of intellectual acumen. She was both blessed and cursed with a highly intuitive learning style that often put her at odds with the traditional education system.On top of that she was shut in by a lengthy illness as a child. and as a result. was home-schooled for a significant portion of her elementary school years.However, the one pursuit that made sense to Ms. Spalding from a very early age was music. At age four, after watching classical cellist Yo-Yo Ma perform on an episode of Mister Rogers' Neighborhood, the road map was suddenly very clear."That was when I realized that I wanted to do something musical" she says. It was definitely the thing that hipped me to the whole idea of music as a creative pursuit."Within a year, she had essentially taught herself to play the violin well enough to land a spot in The Chamber Music Society of Oregon. a community orchestra that was open to both children and adult musicians. She stayed with the group for 10 years, and by age 15, she had been elevated to a concertmaster position. By then she had also discovered the bass, and all of the non-classical avenues that the instrument could open for her.Suddenly, playing classical music in a community orchestra wasn't enough for the young teenager anymore.Before long she was playing blues. funk. hip-hop. and a variety of other styles on the local club circuit. Her first band. Noise for Pretend expanded her musical horizons and presented her earliest opportunities to sing and write music.At 15. Ms. Spalding left high school for good. Armed with her GED and aided by a generous scholarship. she enrolled in the music program at Portland State University.After a move to the opposite coast and three years of accelerated study. Berklee College of Music was the place where the pieces all came together and doors started opening.She not only earned a BM. but also signed on as an instructor in 2005 at the age of 20 - an appointment that has made her one of the youngest faculty members in the history of the college.She was the 2005 recipient of the prestigious Boston Jazz Society scholarship for outstanding musicianship.Ms. Spalding has gone through several phases. which have been well documented during her brief recording career. Her journey as a solo artist began with the 2006 release of Junjo. on the Spanish label Ayva Music which featured pianist Aruan Ortiz and drummer Francisco Mela. She presented the many different sides of her writing on Esperanzo, her 2008 international debut recording for Heads Up. a division of Concord Music Group, which quickly topped Billboard's Contemporary Jazz Chart and became the year's best selling album worldwide by a new jazz artist. Numerous awards and appearances followed including an invitation by President Barack Obama to appear at both the White House and the Nobel Peace Prize Ceremony. and an appearance on the LateShow with David Letterman that found Letterman and bandleader Paul Shaffer proclaiming the young musician the coolest" guest in the three-decade history of the program. Ms.Spalding continues to spread her message around the globe. In addition to over no Chamber Music Society concerts. she still found time to tour with Joe Lovano's UsFive. perform at Rock In Rio with Milton Nascimento. play at Prince's Welcome 2 America tour. and join Wayne Shorter in celebrating Herbie Hancock's 70th birthday at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles.

76  Hubbard Street Dance
Hubbard Street Dance Chicago returns for a one-night-only program featuring choreography by William Forsythe. Raised in New York, Forsythe had a 20-year tenure as director of Ballett Frankfurt before starting his own company in Germany. He is one of the choreographers who changed ballet from its identification with 19th-century classical repertoire to a more dynamic, 21st-century art form. The program will include Quintett, Forsythe’s tribute to his wife, who died of cancer at the age of 32; N.N.N.N., a piece for four men; and One Flat Thing, reproduced, inspired by the risk and adventure of Robert Scott’s arctic expeditions, during which explorers relied on each other for survival. One Flat Thing is performed via performed within the confines of a tightly-spaced set of tables, a thrilling sequence of team choreography that runs dangerously close to reckless abandon.
What Makes It Renegade? William Forsythe is a true post-modernist dance maker who has defiantly turned ballet’s orientation away from its 19th-century traditions toward the future by embracing forward-looking aesthetic ideas — dance, voice, text, sound, visual art, and anything else at hand — to create trans-disciplinary works.
HUBBARD STREET 2, founded by Julie Nakagawa and Lou Conte in 1997 and now led by Terence Marling. prepares dancers ages 18 to 2S for careers in contemporary dance and identifies next-generation choreographers. While members of the company, talented young artists receive professional experience in a dynamic environment that fosters artistic growth while allowing them to hone multiple techniques. To date, 12 members of HS2 have advanced to Hubbard Street's main company, with numerous others joining Hubbard Street’s main company, with numerous others joining top dance companies worldwide.HS2's dancers reach thousands annually with diverse programming that provides valuable outreach in schools, site-specific work in museums and cultural institutions. and evening-length repertoire performances. HS2 has been honored to perform at many prestigious venues including the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Joyce SoHo. and North Carolina School of the Arts, and overseas in Germany, Luxembourg. South Africa and Switzerland.As part of its mission to identify and nurture young choreographers, HS2 initiated a National Choreographic Competition in 1999. Each year, the competition provides residencies offering choreographers opportunities to create original work and conduct master classes for the community. The competition has gained an esteemed reputation, international recognition. and produced nearly 30 works lJf notable choreographers including Robert Battle, Aszure Barton. Camille Brown, Norbert De La Cruz III, Gregory Dolbashian Jonathan Fredrickson. Alex Ketley, Gabrielle Lamb. Edwaard Liang. Terence Marling. Andrea Miller, Katarzyna Skarpetowsk a Samar Haddad King, Dominic Walsh. and Edgar Zendejas

77  Manganiyar Seduction
Director Roysten Abel experimented boldly with the Manganiyars, desert musicians from Rajasthan, to create something startlingly new: The Manganiyar Seduction. Roysten’s concept created a dazzling union between the Manganiyars’ music and the visual seduction of Amsterdam’s Red Light District. Arranged in four horizontal rows, one on top of the other, 43 musicians are seated in 36 re-curtained cubicles. The show begins with a single cubicle lighting up to reveal the first performer, followed by another, and so on, creating a dramatic and musical roller coaster that transports listeners to an unknown world. “The effect is like that of a gospel Mass or a slow-building rave; a joyous, communal experience of the seductive power of music.”
THE MANGANIYARS are a caste of Muslim musicians who are predominantly settled in the districts of Jaisalmer, Barmer, and Jodhpur,which are in the heart of the Thar Desert. They traditionally performed for the kings, but over the years, their patrons shifted from the kings to people who could give them a meal. In the 1970s. the late ethnomusicoiogist Kamal Kothari discovered the Manganiyars and gave them a new life in contemporary times. Their repertoire includes ballads about the kings as well as Sufi poems written by various mystics. They also have songs for various occasions like birth. marriage, and feasts. Even though they are classified as folk musicians, their traditional music is classical and clearly displays the roots of classical music in India. The combination of their folk music's rawness and their classical music's complexity is a trait that makes their music so special.

78  Ukulele Orchestra of
Renowned for its “perfectly polished professionalism, threaded through with dry wit and wry humor” (The Independent), the Ukulele Orchestra of Great Britain has seen over 9,000 days of ukulele action. This group of all-singing, all-strumming ukulele players holds that all genres of music are available for reinterpretation, as long as they are played on the ukulele. With instruments small and large, in high and low registers, playing intricate melodies, simple tunes, and complex chords, the ensemble wields the limitations of the instrument with virtuosic expertise, revealing unsuspected musical insight. With cheerful nods to both the pompous and the trivial, the “Ukes’” performances are at once moving and amusing, hailing the popular and the highbrow.
UKULELE ORCHESTRA OF GREAT BRITAIN is the original and the world's first ukulele orchestra which set the form for thousands of others and which has been delighting audiences, raising the roof, selling out performances, and receiving standing ovations since 1985.The show is a genre-crashing ride through popular music a funny, virtuosic foot-stomping obituary of Rock 'n' Roll and melodious light entertainment. Post-punk performance collides with classical hits and toe-tapping oldies in a thought-provoking journey through songs that you've heard, songs you've forgotten. songs you've never heard. and songs you wish you hadn't encountered all transformed into a lively, headlong stream of transcendent sound musical delight and warm personalities featuring only the "bonsai guitar" and a menagerie of voices.The Orchestra is celebrated for its rapport with audiences and feel-good reactions. With no gimmicks no stage set, props or scenery, no special effects. no light show, no dancers. the Ukulele Orchestra of Great Britain tears the house down with original arrangements of familiar songs, catchy tunes. and sharp wit a cracking combination which draws audiences into a joyous world.During its 28 years of existence, the Ukulele Orchestra of Great Britain has given thousands of concerts. TV, and radio appearances all over the world Tours have included England Scotland Northern Ireland Eire, Wales, France, Germany, Norway, Sweden. Finland Denmark, The Netherlands. Belgium, America Canada New Zealand Slovenia, Switzerland, Japan, The Czech Republic, Monaco, Spain. Poland Estonia, Italy, Australia, and the North Pole. Current tour plans include China and South America.The Orchestra staying true to early trail-blazing indie ethics. has remained independent of corporate control throughout its successful career like the ukulele, it is small perfectly formed yet life-affirmingly subversive.

79  Jerusalem String Qua
“An absolute triumph. Their playing has everything you could possibly wish for.” (BBC Music Magazine) Returning for their fifth UMS concert, the Jerusalem Quartet started some 20 years ago when its members were teenagers, and their confident energy and exquisite sensitivity have kept audiences on the edges of their seats since their UMS debut in 2005.
The JERUSALEM QUARTET. hailed by The Strad as "one of the young, yet great quartets of our time." has garnered international acclaim for its rare combination of passion and precision. The ensemble has won audiences the world over. bothin concert and on their recordings for the Harmonia Mundi label. They will return to North America for a nine-city tour in October 2012 and again in March 2013, when they will perform the complete Shostakovich quartet cycle for the Friends of Chamber Music in Portland, Oregon and for the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center in New York.The Quartet performs regularly in Europe, with recent appearances at venues such as the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam, the Herkulessaal in Munich, London’s Wigmore Hall, and the Cite de la Musique in Paris, as well as venues in cities including Brussels. Antwerp, Gent, Lucerne. Dortmund, Perugia, Genoa, Siena, and Le Mans. They recently concluded a three-year residency at Musica Viva Australia with a lO-concert tour that included Sydney, Melbourne. Perth, and Brisbane.The Jerusalem Quartet is a record three-time recipient of BBC Music Magazine·s Chamber Music Award, most recently for their CD of Mozart quartets (2012), as well as for their recordings of Haydn (2010) and Shostakovich (2007). The Quartet's recording of Schubert's Death and the Maiden and Quartettsatz in c minor was featured as "Editor"s Choice" in the July 2008 edition of Gramophone, and was also awarded an ECHO Classic chamber music award in 2009. The Quartet records exclusively for Harmonia Mundi.In November 2007, the Quartet was awarded First Prize in the ""Most Impressive Performance by a (Small) Ensemble" category of the Netherlands· Vereniging van Schouwburgen en Concertgebouwdirecties. In 2003, they received the first Borletti- Buitoni Trust Award, and were part of the first-ever BBC New Generation Artists scheme between 1999-2001.The Jerusalem Quartet formed while its members were students at the Jerusalem Conservatory of Music and Dance. They quickly found a shared commitment to the music that has not only endured but also propelled them to the highest level of performance. Violist Ori Kam joined the group in 2011, upon the departure of founding violist Amihai Grosz.

80  Bullet Catch
A stunt so dangerous that Houdini refused even to attempt it, the magic trick known as the Bullet Catch has claimed the lives of at least 12 illusionists, assistants, and spectators since its conception in 1613. Writer and performer Rob Drummond explores the history of the Bullet Catch, including the true story of William Henderson, who died in 1912 attempting the infamous trick. Drummond reads the minds of his audience as he leads them through a darkly humorous and engaging theatrical magic show featuring levitation, games of chance, and — for those who dare stay to the very end —the most notorious finale in show business.
ROB DRUMMOND is an award winning playwright. performer. and director from Glasgow. His wide ranging work includes the critically acclaimed WRESTliNG (Arches. 2011). which involved five months professional wrestling training. and a modern retelling of The Passion (George Square. Glasgow 2011) . Recent projects include The Riot of Spring, a response to Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring, where he worked with a choreographer for The Arches and National Theatre of Scotland's Auteurs Project. and Quiz Show (Traverse, Edinburgh). Bullet Catch was a huge hit at the 2012 Edinburgh Fringe. winning a Herald Angel Award and Total Theatre Award.

81  Kronos Quartet
For 40 years, the Kronos Quartet has pursued a singular artistic vision, combining a spirit of fearless exploration with an ongoing commitment to re-imagining the string quartet experience. They started out as classical music’s original renegades and continue that cause to this very day. When asked to design a pair of concerts for UMS’s Renegade Series, they delivered. Their Friday concert is devoted to historical renegades, ranging from Richard Wagner to Laurie Anderson and George Crumb, representing a look at those composers who shook up the status quo over the past 150 years. Their Saturday concert takes a contemporary approach to the notion of Renegade, using their platform as artists to tell us stories of governmental power and war making run amok. String quartet playing as political act – renegade, indeed.
For 40 years, San Francisco's KRONOS QUARTET - David Harrington (violin), John Sherba (violin), Hank Dutt (viola), and Sunny Yang (cello) - has combined a spirit of fearless exploration with a commitment to continually re-imagining the string quartet experience. In the process, Kronos has become one of the world's most celebrated and influential ensembles, performing thousands of concerts worldwide, releasing more than 50 recordings, collaborating with many of the world's most intriguing and accomplished composers and performers. and commissioning more than 800 works and arrangements for string quartet. A Grammy winner, Kronos is also the only recipient of both the Polar Music Prize and the Avery Fisher Prize.Integral to Kronos' work is a series of long-running, in-depth collaborations wit h many of the world's foremost composers, including Americans Terry Riley, Philip Glass, and Steve Reich; Azerbaijan's Franghiz Ali-Zadeh; Poland's Henryk G6recki; and Serbia's Aleksandra Vrebalov. Additional collaborators in concert and/or on record have included Chinese pipa virtuoso Wu Man, performance artist Laurie Anderson, Azeri vocalist Alim Qasimov, legendary Bollywood “playback singer" Asha Bhosle, Inuit throat singer Tanya Tagaq, and rockers Tom Waits. Amon Tobin, and the Icelandic group Sigur Ros.The quartet spends five months per year on tour, appearing in the world's most prestigious concert halls. clubs, and festivals. Kronos is equally prolific and wide-ranging on recordings, including the Nonesuch Records releases Pieces of Africa (1992), a showcase of African-born composers that simultaneously topped Billboard's Classical and World Music lists; Nuevo (2002) a Grammy- and Latin Grammy-nominated celebration of Mexican culture; the 2004 Grammy Award-winner, Alban Berg's Lyric Suite; and Music of Vladimir Mortynov (2011).With a staff of 10 based in San Francisco, the non-profit Kronos Performing Arts Association (KPAA) manages all aspects of Kronos' work, including the commissioning of new works, concert tours, and home-season performances and education programs.

82  Dianne Reeves Quarte
Blue Note recording artist Dianne Reeves is one of the pre-eminent jazz vocalists in the world today. As a result of her virtuosity, improvisational prowess and unique jazz and R&B stylings, Dianne Reeves received the Grammy for Best Jazz Vocal Performance for three consecutive recordings – a Grammy first in any vocal category. She has recorded, performed, and collaborated extensively with Wynton Marsalis, the Chicago Symphony, and the Berlin Philharmonic. She returns with her quartet for her fourth UMS appearance — and her first in five years. This special concert opens with a set by Raul Midón, a blind singer-songwriter and guitarist whose distinct voice, strumming, beats, and vocal trumpet resulted in a standing ovation when he appeared on “Late Night with David Letterman” and an open invitation back to “The Tonight Show with Jay Leno.” He performed at The Ark in May 2010 and now makes his UMS debut. Guitar magazine describes him as “one of those rare musical forces that reminds us how strong and deep the connection between man and music can sometimes be.”
Dianne REEVES is the preeminent jazz vocalist in the world today. As a result of her virtuosity, improvisational prowess, and unique jazz and R&B stylings, she received the Grammy Award for Best Jazz Vocal Performance" for three consecutive recordings - a Grammy first in any vocal category.Ms. Reeves appeared in George Clooney's Good Night, and Good Luck, the Academy Award-nominated film that chronicles Edward R Murrow’s confrontation with Senator Joseph McCarthy. The soundtrack recording of Good Night, and Good Luck provided Ms. Reeves her fourth "Best Jazz Vocal Performance" Grammy Award in 2006.Ms. Reeves has recorded and performed extensively with Wynton Marsalis and the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra. She has also recorded with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra conducted by Daniel Barenboim was a featured soloist with Sir Simon Rattle and the Berlin Philharmonic. She was the first Creative Chair for Jazz for the Los Angeles Philharmonic and the first singer to ever perform at the famed Walt Disney Concert Hall.Ms. Reeves worked with legendary producer Arif Mardin (Norah Jones. Aretha Franklin) on the Grammy Award-winning A Little Moonlight, an intimate collection of 10 standards featuring her touring trio. When her first holiday collection Christmas Time is Here was released in 2004 Ben Ratliffof The New York Times raved. "Ms. Reeves. a jazz singer of frequently astonishing skill takes the assignment seriously; this is one of the best jazz Christmas CDs I've heard:In 2007, Ms.Reeves was featured in an award-winning documentary on the all-too-brief life of Billy Strayhorn. Her first solo album in several years, When You Know, was released in 2008. Since then. she has been touring the world in a variety of contexts including Sing the Truth " a musical celebration of Nina Simone which also featured Liz Wright and Angelique Kidjo. Ms. Reeves began 2011 performing at the White House State Dinner for the President of China Hu Jintao.

83  Kodo
Drums did more than make music in Japanese tradition. They were valuable tools found at every shrine. They marked the physical and metaphorical edge of a village. If you could hear them beat, you were part of the community. Kodo has lived this principle for 30 years, using thundering, soothing sounds that turn audiences into one big village from Asia to South America. “The drum is a ritual tool in Japan, played whenever a community needs to come together. If Kodo can bring drums and travel around the world and deliver the sound of drums there, we can unite the people who hear the sound and make them part of a community,” says Kodo member Jun Akimoto. Under its new artistic director, Kabuki luminary Tamasaburo Bando, the group’s 23rd UMS appearance features a brand-new performance that includes new visual flair alongside its high-energy percussion, elegant music, dance, and the striking physical prowess needed to sustain a precise yet powerful sound.
Kodo, the taiko drumming pioneers from Japan's remote and inspiring Sado Island, have powerful mastery over their instruments. It's a power that can be tender or explosive, delicate or thunderous. Since they burst onto the world scene in 1981, the group has roused and moved audiences around the globe, touring for months out of the year and playing thousands of concerts. performing in nearly every venue of note - from Amsterdam's Concertgebouw to Carnegie Hall from Disney Hall to Lincoln Center, from Paris's Palais Garnier to the Berlin Philharmonie. Though steeped in tradition. Kodo turns traditional Japanese music into a stunning spectacle and a vibrant expression of artistic excellence.Under the artistic direction of Japanese Living National Treasure and revered kabuki icon Tarnasaburo Bando the taiko performing arts ensemble is further refining its carefully considered stagecraft combining the centuries' old techniques that Tarnasaburo has absorbed from a lifetime on stage with the vigorous. joyful vision of taiko Kodo has developed over the decades. a vision that extends beyond music into movement and costume.
Kodo has thoughtfully transformed the percussive music of Japan's rural festivals and rituals of harvest and renewal. The ensemble evokes the age-old celebrations of the agricultural cycle. yet pairs ancient pieces with new compositions by respected Japanese composers - from jazz pianists to kabuki masters- and by Kodo members.When Kodo's founders came to Sado in the late 1960s. they were searching for a place to make a new kind of community, a new haven for art. After the group debuted in Berlin and spent most of the 1980s on tour, its founding members returned to their island home to establish Kodo Village. Now a vibrant arts hub. the village houses the ensemble and its apprentices and plays host each year to an annual Earth Celebration. a music and arts festival that brings together the many sounds and cultures Kodo encounters during its months on the road.
This urge to embrace the world's art influences Kodo's compositions and has helped them hone their presentation of their home country's distinctive roots. It has won them acclaim worldwide, and demonstrated the great flexibility and power of Japanese music and art.

84  Propeller: Taming of
Propeller returns after its much talked-about 2011 performances of Richard III and The Comedy of Errors with new productions of Twelfth Night and The Taming of the Shrew, two comedies full of mistaken identities, transformations, and deceptions that ultimately reveal truth.
In The Taming of the Shrew, a man playing a boy dresses up as a girl, which confuses Christopher Sly. In Twelfth Night, a man plays a girl disguised as a boy, which confuses everybody.
Both plays explore beautifully how being in love with the wrong person can reveal true feeling.
Propeller uses an all-male cast as was done in Shakespeare’s day. Mixing a rigorous approach to the text with a modern physical aesthetic, the company updates the productions in surprising ways, with actors also performing live music.
“As directed by Edward Hall, Propeller specializes in knuckle-duster Shakespeare that digs for the harshness beneath the lyricism. Funny, antic, bawdy: the productions are all these expected things. But they also make sure that the chuckles stick in your throat. The poetry may still be pretty; the comedy definitely is not.”

85  1927: The Animals an
A performance that takes film, music, performance, and storytelling and somehow makes it fit together beautifully.
The Animals and Children Took to the Streets is seamlessly synchronized to live music, performance and storytelling. With stunning films and animation, this is the wickedly twisted tale from the multiple award-winning company behind the international hit Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea. Like a giant graphic novel burst into life, 1927 invite you on a theatrical journey of startling originality.
Recommended for ages 8+.
“The macabre, musically ingenious, and graphically glorious company called 1927… anyone interested in theater should see this company now.”
“1927: Their star is on the ascendant and there is nothing quite like them.”
“A wonderfully surreal step outside everyday life”
“This is a perfect alternative show. In fact, it is a perfect show.”
“A jaw droppingly clever and gloriously subversive parable…1927 conjure a world so complete it feels as if you’ve fallen down a rabbit hole”
1927 is a performance company that specializes in combining performance and live music with animation and film to create magical filmic theater! Celebrated at home and overseas. 19Z7 was founded in 200S by writer, performer. and director Suzanne Andrade and animator and illustrator Paul Barritt. In 2006. performer and costume designer Esme Appleton and performer, composer, and musician Lillian Henley joined and in 2007 producer Jo Crowley began collaborating with the company. All four creative members of 1927 come from different artistic backgrounds. and it is the collaboration and complete integration between these various disciplines that has paved the way for the company to create its innovative and original work1927 cut their teeth on the London cabaret scene The Company performed the beginnings of their debut show in cabaret venues, spoken word nights, and comedy clubs and supported major cabaret acts and bands. including The Dresden Dolls at the Roundhouse London. In 2007. 1927 premiered its debut show Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe. Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Seo was immensely successfuL achieving critical acclaim. multiple sell- out seasons and winning five Industry Awards (Herald AngeL Fringe First. Arches Brick. Carol Tamber. and Total Theatre Award). Following the success and unprecedented demand which followed their Edinburgh debut. over the course of the last four years 1927 has presented the show in two sell-out London seasons. toured to venues and festivals in every region in the UK and across the globe to major international theaters and arts festivals including PS122 and Under the Radar in New York. Sydney Opera House. Malthouse Theatre Melbourne, Adelaide Cabaret Festival Perth Festival (Australia), Spoleto Festival (USA), Uijeongbu Music Theatre Festival (Korea), Singapore Festival Mladi Levi Festival (Slovenia), Dublin Festival Belfast Festival Macau Festival Hanover Festival (Germany), and the New Zealand Festival. Along the way,the company has steadily developed a huge following of dedicated supporters and has been garnered with critical acclaim. sell-out runs, two New York Drama Desk Award Nominations and won the Peter Brook Empty Space A ward for kBest Ensemble"in 2008.In 2010, following over a year of making, buried away in their studio in East London and research. development and work-in-progress performances in London. Glasgow, Edinburgh. NE"N'bury, and Chichester, 1927 premiered its second production The Animals and Children Took to the Streets in Australia at Sydney Opera House and the Malthouse Theatre, Melbourne. The show had its UK premiere at HAC in London in December 2010 and January 2011, garnering widespread critical acclaim. and winning the 2011 Off West End ward for Best Entertainment."In 2011 and 2012 the show toured to Australia China, New Zealand Sri Lanka, United Arab Emirates, France, Nigeria Croatia Ireland France, and the US. In the UK it was presented at Holt Festival Latitude Festival was selected as part of the 2011 British Council Edinburgh showcase and in London was presented at the National Theatre in December 2011 and January 2012. The show returned to the National Theatre in December 2012 and January 2013 where it was presented for a second month-long repertory season in the larger Lyttelton Theatre. 1927 also recently collaborated with the Komische Opera in Berlin, Germany to create an new production of The Magic Flute which premiered in November 2012 and will be running in rep until July 2013.In 2013 1927 will be growing as it begins working with a new cast to tour The Animals and Children took to the Streets across the UK and internationally for an II-month tour, visiting Hong Kong, Jordan, France, Switzerland the US, Spain. China. Israel Holland Russia Latvia Ireland Austria Italy, New Zealand, Azerbaijan, The Ukraine, Armenia Georgia and Malta. In 2013, 1927 will begin to develop a new production for premiere in 2014. 1927 is based in London and is an Associate Company of the Young Vic Theatre.

86  NT - Othello
High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater. The National Theatre presents a major new production of William Shakespeare’s celebrated play about the destructive power of jealousy. Olivier Award-winning actor Adrian Lester (Henry V at the National Theatre) takes the title role. Playing opposite him as the duplicitous Iago is fellow Olivier Award-winner Rory Kinnear (The Last of the Haussmans), who is reunited with director Nicholas Hytner following their acclaimed collaboration on the National Theatre’s recent production of Hamlet. Othello, newly married to the young Desdemona, is appointed leader of a major military operation. Iago, passed over for promotion by Othello in favor of Cassio, persuades Othello that Cassio and Desdemona are having an affair.

87  Compagnie Kafig
Artistic director Mourad Merzouki is at the forefront of the international hip-hop dance scene. Käfig’s sensational double bill of Correria and Agwa derives from an encounter between Mourad and 11 young male dancers from Rio de Janeiro at the Lyon Dance Biennial in 2006. Their individual stories about life in the favelas (Brazilian shanty towns) and their determination to make something of themselves inspired Mourad to create two heart-stopping works that showcase the young Brazilians’ irresistible cocktail of athletic samba, hip-hop, and capoeira dance styles, highlighting astonishing acrobatic skills and dazzling virtuosity.
New this season! As part of our focus on dance in 2013-2014, a small set of tweet seats will be available at each dance performance, including the Friday, February 14 performance of Compagnie Kafig.
Artistic director Mourad Merzouki is at the forefront of the international hip-hopdance world . COMPAGNIE KAFIG's sensational double-bill of Correria and Agwa derives from an encounter between Mr. Merzouki and 11 young male dancers from Rio de Janeiro at the Lyon Dance Biennial in 2006. Their individual stories about life in the favelas (Brazilian shanty towns) and their determination to make something of themselves inspired Mr. Merzouki to create two heart-stopping works that showcase the young Brazilians' irresistible blend of athletic samba, hip-hop, and capoeira dance styles, highlighting astonishing acrobatic skills and dazzling virtuosity.Compagnie Kafig works at the intersection of many different disciplines: in addition to the exploration of all hip-hop styles, the company adds circus, martial arts, fine arts, and live music. Without losing sight of hip-hop movement's roots or of its social and geographical origins, this multidisciplinary approach opens up newer horizons and reveals completely newer processes.
Since 1996, 21 works by Compagnie Kafig have been performed in more than 600 cities internationally. In 18 years, Compagnie Kafig has presented over 2,300 performances in 61 countries for an audience of more than 1 million people.

88  Theatre des Bouffes
There are shadows lurking in the periphery of even the most jovial surroundings. And there is no one better to explore these shadows with than the legendary stage and film director Peter Brook, whose 71-year career at the Royal Shakespeare Company, London’s West End, Paris’s Theatre des Bouffes du Nord and countless other companies has irrevocably changed contemporary theater. The Suit “brims with a gentle effervescence and musicality that you associated with entertainments usually described, a bit dismissively, as charming,” says theNew York Times. “Yet even as it draws you in like the gregarious host of an intimate party, this story of adultery in apartheid South Africa is quietly preparing to break your heart.” Brook’s tender production articulates the nuances of life’s highs and lows through a tale of simmering resentment that is less about betrayal than forgiveness – and the devastating heartbreak that can befall humans who are unable to forgive.
is located near the Gare du Nord in Paris. Peter Brook found the former music hall in decline in 1974 and decided to honor the theater's lOO-year history by preserving it in a state of decay. Built in 1876, the theater fought an out-of-the-way location and a long succession of directors until it was finally condemned and dosed in 1952. Since Mr. Brook revived it, it has presented revolutionary productions. including Lo Tragedie de Carmen, The Mahabharata, and Tierno Bokor. Mr. Brook and partner Micheline Rozan, in addition to retaining the building's history, decided to make the theater as open and accessible as possible with reasonable ticket prices and family- friendly matinees. Mr. Brook stepped down 2011 handing the directorship to Olivier Mantei and Olivier Poubelle.

89  Sabine Meyer
Sabine Meyer was solo clarinetist with the Berlin Philharmonic, a position she left as she became increasingly in demand as a solo artist. Today, in addition to her recital and concerto appearances, she performs in two chamber ensembles, including the Trio di Clarone, whose other members are her husband and her brother. Trio di Clarone began in part because of their shared interest in the basset horn, a rare instrument in the clarinet family that was used in Mozart’s Requiem and in his five divertimenti written for a trio of basset horns. “And so the evening was one of those absolute godsends in musical experience that cannot be fathomed — simply a gift.” (Rems Zeitung)
Sabine Meyer, Wolfgang her brother, and clarinet player Reiner Wehle formed the Trio di Clarone in 1983, sparked by their interest in how the original Divertimenti might have sounded. As the five Divertimenti of Mozart could not form a complete concert program, the trio was faced with the challenge of compiling their concert repertoire. Rather than include compositions of lesser quality by Mozart's contemporaries, they decided to contrast Mozart's ingenious works with important compositions of the present day.This juxtaposition of Mozart and contemporary works soon became a success. Regular concert appearances in Germany and other European countries as well as numerous broadcast recordings and appearances on television have made Trio di Clarone quickly popular. Tours have brought them to the US, Africa, Japan, and China.In their effort to perform seldom-heard original pieces, Trio di Clarone occasionally collaborates with other musicians, allowing the presentation of truly rare and interesting programs, including pieces for three singers and three clarinet players or works for three clarinets and piano. To celebrate their 10th anniversary, Trio di Clarone collaborated with well-known American jazz clarinettist Eddie Daniels in a cross-over program, which was released on CD as Blues for Sabine by EMI Classics.In 2000, Trio di Clarone toured with German jazz clarinettist Michael Riessler for promotion of Bach 2000, which was also released by EMI Classics as Bach in 1 Hour. The trio has also collaborated and recorded with French hurdy-gurdy player, Pierre Charial, on their piece entitled Paris Mecanique. Their most recent project, released in summer 2009, is Invitacion al Danzon with Paquito D'Rivera.

90  Kidd Pivot
Integrating movement, original music, text, and rich visual design, Kidd Pivot’s performance work is assembled with recklessness and rigor, balancing sharp exactitude with irreverence and risk. Kidd Pivot’s distinct choreographic language, which fuses classical elements with the complexity and freedom of structured improvisation, is marked by a strong theatrical sensibility and a keen sense of wit and invention. The Tempest Replica is based on motifs from Shakespeare’s play. Artistic director Crystal Pite stages a game of revenge and forgiveness, reality and imagination. Canadian Crystal Pite danced with William Forsythe’s Ballett Frankfurt and serves as associate choreographer of Nederlands Dans Theater. Her company has been based in Vancouver since its founding in 2002.
“Pite’s as energetic as a sparkler and fluid as quicksilver.”

91  Berlin Philharmonic
Returning to Hill Auditorium for the first time since 2009, the Berlin Philharmonic and music director Simon Rattle embark on their last tour together, bringing two concerts to Ann Arbor as part of an orchestral residency.
For the first program, they perform Pierre Boulez’ Éclat, a tribute to the late titan's death earlier this year, paired with Mahler’s seldom-performed Symphony No. 7.
The second program combines German Romanticism with early works from composers in the Second Viennese School to provide a fascinating exploration of Viennese musical evolution over the course of 40 years.
“An enthralled crowd, listening agog to the amazing woodwind [quintet] from the Berlin Philharmonic, heard wind playing that was out of this world…Equally, however, the performance provided a unique opportunity for a microcosmic view of the philosophy and practice of the world’s most famous orchestra. Everything that you could see and hear, in intimate detail, that made this quintet so breathtakingly perfect, was a representation of the way the full band operates. An astonishing experience.”
An exquisite blend of wind instruments performing a selection of wind quintet pieces, the Berlin Philharmonic Wind Quintet continues to astonish audiences worldwide with their range of expression, tonal spectrum, and conceptual unity. Indeed, many listeners and critics agree that the ensemble has succeeded in virtually redefining the sound of the classic wind quintet, comprised of flute, oboe, clarinet, horn, and bassoon. U-M Professor Martin Katz, one of the most sought-after collaborative pianists, joins the ensemble for the Poulenc Sextet.
The Berlin Philharmonic Wind Quintet was founded in 1988 during the era of Herbert von Karajan. the first permanently established wind quintet in the famous orchestra's rich tradition of chamber music.With four original members since inception (Marion Reinhard succeeded founding bassoonist Henning Trog in 2009, they are living musical witnesses to the hugely productive and influential musical partnerships of the Berlin Philharmonic not only with Karajan. but also with its two most recent Musical Directors:Qaudio Abbado and Sir Simon Rattle. Naturally, as members of the Berlin Philharmonic. they have also enjoyed important collaborations with every other major conductor of their times. including Leonard Bernstein. Carlos Kleiber, Sir John Barbirolli. Gunter Wand Carlo Maria Giulini Bernard Haitink, Riccardo Muti. James Levine, and Daniel Barenboim.The Berlin Philharmonic Wind Quintet continues to astonish audiences worldwide with their range of expression. their tonal spectrum. and their conceptual unity. Indeed many listeners and critics agree that the ensemble has succeeded in virtually redefining the sound of the classic wind quintet. Their repertoire covers not only the entire spectrum of the wind quintet literature but also includes works for enlarged ensemble. i.e. the sextets of Janacek and Reinicke or the septets of Hindemith and Koechlin. In addition. collaboration with pianists such as Lars Vogt, Stephen Hough Jon Nakamatsu and Lilya Zilberstein have intensified in recent years.The ensemble's commitment to the wind quintet repertoire is passionate and in 1991 they found the perfect partner for their recording plans. the Swedish company BIS Records. already well known in its own right for its uncompromising standards. The results of this long and exclusive collaboration have received critical accolades worldwide - indeed many of these recordings are already widely held to be definitive or reference performances. In addition to their concert appearances throughout Europe, North and South America Israel Australia and the Far East the Berlin Philharmonic Wind Quintet are also popular guests at international festivals such as the Berliner Festwochen. the Edinburgh Festival the London Proms. the Quintette-Biennale Marseille, the Rheingau Festival and the Salzburg Festival. Their television productions and radio broadcasts are seen and heard throughout Europe. Asia. and North America.In recent years the members of the Berlin Philharmonic Wind Quintet have intensified their teaching and coaching roles with youth; they give chamber music workshops and instrumental instruction in many countries. with a particular commitment for example, to the youth orchestra program of Venezuela.

92  NT - She Stoops
For the third year, UMS and the Michigan Theater bring these high-definition screenings of live theater broadcasts by the National Theatre, London. The broadcasts feature plays produced by the National Theatre on cinema screens worldwide. In the US, the “live” screenings are delayed to accommodate the time difference. Broadcasts feature behind-the-scenes footage and interviews with actors.
Hardcastle, a man of substance, looks forward to acquainting his daughter with his old pal’s son with a view to marriage. But thanks to playboy Lumpkin, Hardcastle is mistaken by his prospective son-in-law Marlow for an innkeeper, and his daughter for the local barmaid. The good news is that while Marlow can barely speak to a woman of quality he’s a charmer with those of a different stamp. And so, as Hardcastle’s indignation intensifies, his daughter’s appreciation for her misguided suitor soars. Misdemeanors multiply, love blossoms, and mayhem ensues.
One of the great, generous-hearted and ingenious comedies of the English language, Goldsmith’s She Stoops to Conquer offers a celebration of chaos, courtship and the dysfunctional family.

93  NT - Macbeth
"High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater. National Theatre Live will broadcast Manchester International Festival’s production of Macbeth, with Kenneth Branagh (My Week With Marilyn, Hamlet) in his first Shakespeare performance in over a decade as Macbeth, and Alex Kingston (Doctor Who, ER) as Lady Macbeth. Directed by Rob Ashford and Kenneth Branagh, this electrifying new production of Shakespeare’s tragic tale of ambition and treachery unfolds within the walls of an intimate deconsecrated Manchester church."
Discounted tickets for UMS Subscribers and Donors as well as Michigan Theater Members are available. Please call 734-764-2538 to purchase your tickets and receive that benefit.

94  Canadian Brass
Five tremendous brass musicians — each a virtuoso in his own right — form the legendary Canadian Brass. With an international reputation as one of the most popular brass ensembles today, Canadian Brass performs brass standards as well as a wide-ranging library of original arrangements created especially for them, including the works of Renaissance and Baroque masters, classical works, marches, holiday favorites, ragtime, Dixieland, big band, Broadway, and popular songs and standards. This Thanksgiving-weekend concert is sure to start your holidays off with a bang. Canadian Brass came about when friends Chuck Daellenbach (tuba, the only original member still playing with the group) and Gene Watts (trombone) got together to form a brass quintet in 1970. At the time, brass quintets were not entirely new, but they had never garnered the huge success that Canadian Brass has since made possible. Masters of concert presentation — from formal classical concerts to music served up with lively dialogue and theatrical effects — Canadian Brass has developed a uniquely engaging stage presence and rapport with audiences. The hallmark of any Canadian Brass performance is entertainment, spontaneity, virtuosity, and, most of all, fun.
Friends Chuck Daellenbach and Gene Watts first came together in 1970 to form a brass quintet a chamber music setting not entirely new, but never before having garnered the success and storied career Canadian Brass would achieve over the next 40 years. With a vast repertoire from Baroque masters to marches, holiday favorites to Dixieland, and jazz to Broadway, Canadian Brass has created their own musical world by transcribing, arranging, and commissioning more than 200 works.
Frequent guests of many major symphony orchestras, they are on the cutting edge of technology offering their fans multimedia opportunities including an iPhone app. Education plays a key role in the story of the Canadian Brass; a vital part of their outreach is their role as clinicians for Conn-Selmer, as well as their support and interaction with El Sistema, the acclaimed global music education program. Since 1998, Canadian Brass has been an exclusive artist at Opening Day Entertainment Group.With a discography of over 90 albums and an extensive world-wide touring schedule, Canadian Brass is an important pioneer in bringing brass music to mass audiences everywhere. They have sold over one million albums worldwide and continue to score Billboard chart positions while playing to packed houses throughout the US, Canada, Japan, and Europe. They were the first brass ensemble from the West to perform in the People's Republic of China (where they returned for a five city tour to great acclaim in the spring of 2010) as well as the first brass group to take the stage at the venerable Carnegie Hall. They have also performed in Australia, the Middle East, the Soviet Union, and South America. Millions of television viewers have had Canadian Brass come into their homes with appearances on The Tonight Show, Today, and Entertainment Tonight, as well as numerous PBS specials.

95  Chanticleer
Hailed by The New Yorker as “the world’s reigning male chorus,” Chanticleer has developed a remarkable reputation for its vivid interpretations of vocal literature that spans 10 centuries, from Gregorian chant and Renaissance to jazz, gospel, and venturesome new music. Named for the “clear-singing” rooster in Geoffrey Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, Chanticleer is known for its seamless blend of 12 male voices ranging from countertenor to bass; the group “fascinates and enthralls for much the same reason a fine chocolate or a Rolls Royce does: through luxurious perfection.”
Called the world's reigning male chorus named “Ensemble of the Year" by Musical America in 2008, the San Francisco-based Grammy Award-winning ensemble CHANTICLEER embarks upon its 36th season in 2013- 2014. A winter international tour of nine European countries will see debuts in Dublin. Moscow, and St. Petersburg; and returns to Paris. Vienna Budapest Prague, Antwerp. Rotterdam. and Bruges. Chanticleer is known around the world as an orchestra of voices for the seamless blend of its 12 male voices ranging from countertenor to bass and its original interpretations of vocal literature, from Renaissance to jazz, and from gospel to venturesome new music.Since Chanticleer began releasing recordings in 1981 the group has sold well over a million copies and garnered two Grammy Awards. Chanticleer's recordings are distributed by Chanticleer Records, Naxos, Rhino Records, Arkiv Music, and iTunes. In addition to Someone New, Chanticleer will release a live recording of She Said/He Said on its Chanticleer live in Concert (CUC)series.With the help of individual contributions and foundation and corporate support the Ensemble involves over 5,000 young people annually in its extensive education programs. The Louis A. Botto (LAB) Choir - an after-school honors program for high school and college students - is now in its fourth year, adding to the ongoing program of in-school clinics and workshops, Chanticleer Youth Choral Festivals in the Bay Area and around the country, master classes for students nationwide, and the Chanticleer in Sonoma summer workshop for adult choral singers. The Singing Life, a documentary about Chanticleer's work with young people, was released in 2008. In 2010, Chanticleer's education program was recognized by the Chorus America Education Outreach Award.Chanticleer's long-standing commitment to commissioning and performing new works was honored in 2008 by the inaugural Dale Warland / Chorus America Commissioning Award and the ASCAP/Chorus America Award for Adventurous Programming.Named for the “clear-singing" rooster in Geoffrey Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, Chanticleer was founded in 1978 by tenor Louis Botto, who sang in the Ensemble until 1989 and served as Artistic Director until his death in 1997.

96  Charles Lloyd Quarte
Forty years ago, saxophonist Charles Lloyd was a pop star; his 1966 album, Forest Flower, sold a million copies. Four years ago, at 69, when most individuals are thinking of ways to slow down and kick back, Lloyd shifted to a higher gear and formed a new quartet. Lloyd has always led exceptional bands, and this is perhaps the best. With MacArthur fellow Jason Moran on piano, Reuben Rogers on bass, and Eric Harland on drums, the Quartet’s concerts are events of pristine beauty and elegance, full of intensely-felt emotion and passion that touch deep inside the heart. This is not entertainment, but the powerful uncorrupted expression of beauty through music. Lloyd’s latest release, Mirrors, “sees him attaining jazz nirvana, calling numbers that channel his love of Monk, eastern spiritualism, California, and traditional gospel music. Listening is like a meditation, and the sparse, taut accompaniment of the quartet keeps everything in focus.” (Jazz Choice)
Charles Lloyd was born in Memphis, Tennessee, on March 15, 1938. From an early age, he was immersed in that city's rich musical life and was exposed to jazz. He began playing the saxophone at the age of 9. Pianist Phineas Newborn became his mentor, and took him to Irvin Reason for lessons. His closest friend in high school was trumpeter Booker Little. Mr. Lloyd worked in Phineas Sr.'s band and became a sideman in the blues bands of B.B. King, Howlin' Wolf, Johnnie Ace, and Bobbie "Blue" Bland.In 1956 Charles Lloyd moved to Los Angeles and earned a master's degree from the University of Southern California. During this period he played in Gerald Wilson's big band and also had his own group that included Billy Higgins, Don Cherry, Bobby Hutcherson, and Terry Trotter. He joined Chico Hamilton in 1960 when the band was best known for playing "chamber jazz" at the beginning of Mr. Lloyd's tenure. His influence as a composer and a player quickly pushed the group in a more progressive post-bop direction, especially after Hamilton asked him to serve as music director. Mr. Lloyd's key musical partner in the band was Hungarian guitarist Gabor Szabo. In 1964, Mr. Lloyd left the ensemble to join alto saxophonist Cannonball Adderly. During this period he recorded two albums as a leader for Columbia Records, Discovery and Of Course, Of Course', his sidemen were other young musicians including Herbie Hancock, Ron Carter, and Tony Williams. Through 1965-1969 Mr. Lloyd led a quartet with pianist Keith Jarrett, bassist Cecil McBee (later Ron McClure), and drummer Jack DeJohnette. The quartet's music was an interesting fusion of straight-ahead post-bop, free jazz, and world music. The group's music quickly caught the attention of both jazz fans and critics. Somewhat surprisingly, they also achieved a fair amount of crossover success with young rock fans and became the first jazz group to play The Fillmore. The album Forest Flower, Live at Monterey became a commercial hit, largely on the strength of the title track. Other albums recorded during this period include Dream Weaver, In the Soviet Union, and In Europe, all released on Atlantic Records. In 1970, after Charles Lloyd had disbanded the quartet, he moved back to California and entered a state of semi-retirement. He practically disappeared from the jazz scene, but can be heard on recordings with the Doors, Canned Heat, and the Beach Boys. During the 1970s he played extensively with The Beach Boys both on their studio recordings and as a member of their touring band.Upon being approached by pianist Michel Petrucciani in 1981, Mr. Lloyd resumed actively playing for two years, only to retreat again. Upon his recovery from a near-death experience in 1986, he decided to rededicate himself to music. In 1989, he reestablished an active touring schedule and began recording for ECM Records. The first ECM release was Fish Out of Water with Bobo Stenson, Palle Danielsson, and Jon Christensen. The ECM recordings showcased his sensitivity as a ballad player and composer. Between 1993 and 1997 the quartet was comprised of Bobo Stenson, Anders Jormin, and Billy Hart. Noteworthy albums include Canto, Voice in the Night, The Water Is Wide (featuring Brad Mehldau, John Abercrombie, Larry Grenadier, and Billy Higgins). Geri Alien later replaced Bobo Stenson, touring and recording with Charles Lloyd between 2001 and 2006 (Lift Every Voice and Jumping the Creek). Drummer Eric Harland joined the quartet in 2002 replacing Billy Higgins and is a member of Mr. Lloyd's Sangam Trio, with tabla master Zakir Hussain. They continue to perform and record together.
Charles Lloyd maintains an active recording and tour schedule. His New Quartet with Jason Moran on piano, Reuben Rogers on bass, and Eric Harland is well matched with Mr. Lloyd's creative and adventurous spirit. They have released three recordings on ECM: Rabo de Nube (2008), Mirror (2010), and Athens Concert (2011).

97  NT - The Magistrate
High-Definition Broadcasts from the National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
Academy Award nominee and Tony Award-winner John Lithgow (Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, Shrek, 3rd Rock from the Sun) takes the title role in Arthur Wing Pinero’s uproarious Victorian farce, directed by Olivier Award-winner Timothy Sheader (Crazy for You and Into the Woods, Regent’s Park Open Air Theatre, London).
In a similar vein to the National Theatre’s smash-hit classic comedies, She Stoops to Conquer and London Assurance, The Magistrate is sure to have audiences doubled up with laughter. When amiable magistrate Posket (John Lithgow) marries Agatha (Olivier Award-winner Nancy Carroll, After the Dance), little does he realise she’s dropped five years from her age – and her son’s. When her deception looks set to be revealed, it sparks a series of hilarious indignities and outrageous mishaps.

98  The King's Singers
Instantly recognizable for their immaculate intonation, vocal blend, diction, incisive timing, and delightfully British wit, they were one of the first groups that UMS President Ken Fischer presented, during an epic 1980s snowstorm in Washington, D.C., the group returns for Fischer’s final year before retiring with a special holiday program that includes works by Tchaikovsky, Lawson, and Pärt, as well as traditional seasonal songs drawn from the King’s Singers Christmas Songbook. “These six singers can do almost anything a full-sized chorus can do, with a degree of perfection that drops the jaw and delights the ear.” (Seattle Times)
The King’s Singers are consummate entertainers, charming the audience with a delightful British wit along with their stunning vocal performance. The group takes its name from King’s College Cambridge, where the original members were choral scholars. Composed of a bass, two baritones, a tenor, and two countertenors, The King’s Singers have a discography of over 150 recordings and have commissioned more than 200 works from prominent contemporary composers. A favorite of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, they performed together at the 2002 Winter Olympics. The group returns to Ann Arbor for the first time since 2005.
ensembles, THE KING'S singers have a packed schedule of concerts, recordings, media and education work that spans the globe. They champion the work of both young and established composers and whether singing Tomkins or Takemitsu Bach or Buble, are instantly recognizable for their spot-on intonation. impeccable vocal blend flawless articulation of the text and incisive timing. They are alsoconsummate entertainers: a class act with a delightfully British wit.During the current concert season. The King's Singers will perform across the globe in some of the world's most famous venues, including Carnegie Hall King's College ChapeL and Dresden Frauenkirche. Their concert schedule will take them to South America France, Germany, Poland Belgium. the Netherlands, North America, Russia, Italy, Switzerland Denmark, and Finland.With a discography of over 150 recordings, The King's Singers have garnered both awards and significant critical acclaim. including a Grammy in 2009 for their studio album Simple Gifts on Signum. Always deeply committed to new choral music, they have commissioned over 200 works from prominent contemporary composers. including Richard Rodney Bennett Berio, Maxwell Davies, Ligeti, Lukaszewslti Penderecki Rutter, Takemitsu and Tavener. Their album High Right includes works commissioned by The King's Singers from Eric Whitacre and Bob Chilcott. It was recorded with the renowned Concordia College Choir and released in 2011 on Signum. Other recent Signum releases include Swimming Over London, which combines some of the group's favorite numbers with new songs and arrangements; a world- premiere recording of Pachelbel's Music for Vespers with Charivari Agreable; and a DVD of Christmas repertoire in 2011.

99  Schola Cantorum of V
What does joy sound like? Schola Cantorum de Venezuela is one of the most important choral societies from the growing choral movement in Venezuela. With a repertoire of more than 50 major symphonic-choral works, the 45-voice SCV is beloved by highly-acclaimed conductors and composers alike. The group has performed several premières by Osvaldo Golijov and John Adams and has appeared on over 35 recordings. The premier touring chorus of Latin America, the Schola Cantorum has a breathtaking range of repertoire, from sacred hymns and motets to propulsive rhythms and tuneful popular idioms of their rich Latin American culture. Every SCV concert is a vivid cultural and joyous experience. They bring infectious passion to each work they sing. Their Ann Arbor debut program, Water and Fiesta, features songs by composers from Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Colombia, Uruguay, Cuba, Mexico, and the US. 
The Schola Cantorum de Venezuela (formerly known as Schola Cantorum de Caracas) is one of the most important choral societies belonging to the growing choral movement in Venezuela. It was founded in 1967 and directed by Alberto Grau, Venezuelan composer and conductor born in Barcelona, Spain. 
The choir's broad repertoire includes works from the Spanish, Italian, French, and English Renaissance; German and Italian Baroque; contemporary Venezuelan and international composers; a vast collection of Venezuelan and Latin American traditional music; and a number of symphonic choral pieces. International tours have taken the Schola to venues in the US, Europe, Mexico, Canada, and South America. The ensemble was chosen for the premiere of Osvaldo Golijov's La Pasion segun San Marcos (Saint Mark Passion) which debuted at the European Music Festival 2000 under the sponsorship of the Bachakademie Stuttgart. The Hanssler Classic recording of this concert was nominated for a 2002 Grammy and Latin Grammy Award in the category of "Best Choral Performance." A new recording of this work was released in 2010 by Deutsche Grammophon in a CD/DVD edition to great critical acclaim. In 2006, under the direction of Peter Sellars, the Schola premiered John Adams' opera A Flowering Tree at the Crown Hope Festival in Vienna, which they subsequently brought to Lincoln Center in New York. A recording of this piece was released in 2008 by Nonesuch Records. Most recently in September 2011, the Schola gave the world premiere of Gonzalo Grau's award-winning oratorio Aqua, commissioned by the Bachakademie. The Schola has more than 50 major symphonic choral works in their repertoire and has performed under the batons of such distinguished conductors such as Sir Simon Rattle, Claudio Abbado, Gustavo Dudamel, Krzysztof Penderecki, Helmuth Rilling, Roberta Spano, John Adams, and Edmon Colomer. 
With a variety of a capella and symphonic choral programs, the Schola Cantorum de Venezuela has appeared internationally at music festivals and concert halls, including the Jose Felix Ribas and Rios Reyna Hall of the Teatro Teresa Carreno in Caracas, Concertgebouw and Royal Carre Theatre in Amsterdam, Royal Festival Hall and Barbican Centre in London, Beethovenhalle in Stuttgart, Nexahualcoyotl Hall of the UNAM in Mexico, Sydney Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music's Howard Gilman Opera House, Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles, and at the Tanglewood, Ravinia, Canary Islands, and Oregon Bach festivals.  A specialized ensemble with unique arrangements and repertoire, the Schola has recorded 26 albums to date. Ana Maria Raga and Maria Guinand are the titular directors. Since 2005, the Schola Cantorum of Venezuela has worked under the aegis of the Schola Cantorum Foundation, a non-profit organization that oversees several other choirs such as the Cantoria Alberto Grau, Pequefios Cantores de la Schola, and Schola Juvenil. Together they provide a complete system to promote and develop choral music in Venezuela.

100 Ariel Quartet
Characterized by its youth, brilliant playing, and soulful interpretations, the Ariel Quartet has earned a glowing international reputation in just a few years on the professional circuit. Formed in Israel, they moved to the US to study at the New England Conservatory’s prestigious Professional String Quartet Training Program and graduated in 2010. Cellist Alisa Weilerstein who last appeared with UMS in 2009, joins the ensemble for its UMS debut.
In October 2013 the Quartet was awarded the prestigious Cleveland Quartet Award and in January 2012 the Quartet was named quartet in- residence at the University of Cincinnati's College-Conservatory of Music, a remarkable accomplishment for such a young ensemble and a testament to the Ariel's skill and dedication to their craft. Formed in Israel, the Quartet moved to the US in 2004 to continue its professional studies. The resident ensemble in the New England Conservatory's prestigious Professional String Quartet Training Program through their graduation in 2010, the Ariel has won a number of international prizes. including the Grand Prize at the 2006 Fischoff National Chamber Music Competition. After they won the Szekely Prize for their performance of Bartok. as well as the overall Third Prize at the Banff International String Quartet Competition in 2007, the American Record Guide described the Ariel Quartet as “a consummate ensemble gifted with utter musicality and remarkable interpretive power" and called their performance of Beethoven's Op. 132 “the pinnacle of the competition.”Highlights of the 2013-14 season include two record-setting performances of the complete Beethoven cycle, performed - for the first time ever - before all the members of a quartet turn 30 years old; a series of performances with the superstar cellist Alisa Weilerstein; a performance at NewYork's 92nd Street Y; a collaborative concert with the brilliant pianist Orion Weiss; and three residencies for the Perlman Music Program. The Quartet continues to astonish with its performances of complete works by memory and has remained committed to performing extensively in Israel.In addition to performing the traditional quartet repertoire, the Ariel Quartet regularly collaborates with many musicians and composers, including pianists Menahem Pressler and Roman Rabinovich; the American and Jerusalem String Quartets; violist Roger Tapping; and cellist Paul Katz. Additionally, the Quartet was quartet-in-residence in the Steans Music Institute at the Ravinia Festival for two consecutive years.

101 St Lawrence String Q
One of the great finds of the 09/10 season was the St. Lawrence String Quartet, which made its UMS debut in a stellar program of Haydn, Ravel, and John Adams. Haydn returns to the program for this appearance, which is bookended with the composer’s quartets. In between, the ensemble performs a new work by Osvaldo Golijov, the Argentinean composer who has worked with the SLSQ since the early 1990s. The SLSQ appears twice with UMS in the 11/12 season; they also perform a new work by John Adams with the San Francisco Symphony in March as part of the American Mavericks concerts.
The St. Lawrence String Quartet graced both Hill Auditorium (with the San Francisco Symphony) and Rackham Auditorium in 2012, reaffirming its undisputed reputation for imaginative and spontaneous music-making. They have “A sound that has just about everything one wants from a quartet, most notably precision, warmth and an electricity that conveys the excitement of playing whatever is on their stands at the moment.”
The ST. LAWRENCE STRING QUARTET (SLSQ) has established itself among the world-class chamber ensembles of its generation . Its mission : bring every piece of music to the audience in vivid color, with pronounced communication and teamwork, and great respect to the composer. Since winning both the Banff International String Quartet Competition and Young Concert Artists International Auditions in 1992, the Quartet has delighted audiences with its spontaneous, passionate, and dynamic performances. “The St. Lawrence are remarkable not simply for the quality of their music making, exalted as it is, but for the joy they take in the act of connection:Whether playing Haydn or premiering a new work, the SlSQ has a rare ability to bring audiences to rapt attention.They reveal surprising nuances in familiar repertoire and illuminate the works of some of today's most celebrated composers. often all in the course of one evening. John Adams has written two critically-acclaimed works expressly for the quartet including String Quartet (2009), and Absolute Jest (2012), which they premiered with the San Francisco Symphony in 2012. In 2011, SLSQ premiered Qohelet, a work composed for them by Osvaldo Golijov.SLSQ maintains a busy touring schedule . Some 2013-14 season highlights include visits to Vancouver, Princeton, Portland (OR), Toronto, Philadelphia Ann Arbor, Palm Beach, Washington. DC and a premiere of a newer work by George Tsontakis in CarmeL California. They will perform Absolute Jest with the Toronto Symphony and on a European tour with the San Francisco Symphony. During the summer season. SLSQ is proud to continue its long association with the Spoleto Festival in Charleston, South Carolina.Since 1998 the SLSQ has held the position of Ensemble in Residence at Stanford University. This residency includes working with music students as well as extensive collaborations with other faculty and departments using music to explore myriad topics. Recent collaborations have involved the School of Medicine, School of Education, and the Law School. In addition to their appointment at Stanford the SLSQ are visiting artists in residence at Arizona State University atTempe.The foursome's passion for opening up musical arenas to players and listeners alike is evident in their annual summer chamber music seminar at Stanford and their many forays into the depths of musical meaning with preeminent music educator Robert Kapilow.
Lesley Robertson and Geoff Nuttall are founding members of the group, and hail from Edmonton Alberta and London Ontario, respectively. Christopher Costanza is from Utica NY, and joined the group in 2003. Mark Fewer, a native of Newfoundland begins his first season with the quartet in 2014, succeeding violinist Scott St. John. All four members of the quartet live and teach at Stanford in the Bay Area of California.

102 Elias String Quartet
“A heaven-storming performance…Big things lie ahead of them.” Taking its name from the German form of Mendelssohn’s oratorio Elijah, the Elias String Quartet was founded in Manchester, England, in 1998 and has quickly established itself as one of the most intense and vibrant quartets of its generation. The group’s North American debut in 2012 included a sold-out concert at Carnegie Hall, with the Philadelphia Inquirer proclaiming, “Few quartets at any stage of their evolution have this much personality.” A UMS debut.
The Elias String Quartet take their name from Mendelssohn's oratorio. Elijah. ofwhich Elias is in its German form. and have quickly established themselves as one of the most intense and vibrant quartets of their generation.They perform around the world collaborating with many different artists.The Quartet was formed in 1998 at the Royal Northern College of Music in Manchester where they worked closely with the late Dr. Christopher Rowland. They also spent a year studying at the Hochschule in Cologne with the Alban Berg quartet. Other mentors in the Quartet's studies include Hugh Maguire, Gyorgy Kurtag, Gabor Takacs-Nagy, Henri Dutilleux, and Rainer Sclunidt.The Quartet made its North American debut in March 2012 to great critical acclaim. In addition to a sold-out concert at Carnegie Hall they were praised in the Washington Post for their “shimmering beauty,” and “Few quartets at any stage of their evolution have this much personality." Their concerts in Philadelphia and in Washington, were with pianist Jonathan Biss; they will return to North America for concerts both with and without Mr. Biss in March 2013.The Quartet has been chosen to participate in BBC Radio 3's prestigious New Generation Artists' scheme, and they are the recipients of a 2010 Borletti-Buitoni Trust Award. With the support of the Borletti-Buitoni Trust the Quartet is now immersed in its Beethoven Project in which they are learning and performing all Beethoven string quartets. The cycles started in 2012-13 and continue throughout this season in Great Britain.The Quartet has performed alongside artists such as Michael Collins. Jonathan Biss, Simon Crawford-Phillips, Ralph Kirshbaum. Alice Neary, Arm Murray, Joan Rogers. Mark Padmore, Roger Vignoles, Michel Dalberto, Peter Cropper, Bernard Gregor-Smith. Ettore Causa, Timothy Boulton, Robin Ireland Adrian Brendel Anthony Marwood. and with the Endellion. Jerusalem and Vertavo Quartets.The Quartet received Second Prize and the Sidney Griller Prize at the Ninth London International String Quartet Competition in 2003 (as the Johnston String Quartet) and were finalists in the Paolo Borciani Competition in 2005. For four years they were resident String Quartet at Sheffield's “Music in the Round" as part of Ensemble 360, taking over from the Lindsay Quartet. The ensemble has released discs by Mozart, Beethoven, and Spohr with Sanctuary Classics and Nimbus.
The Quartet most recently recorded the piano quintets of Schumann and Dvorak with pianist Jonathan Biss, available on the Onyx label. The Quartet's recording of Haydn and Schumann quartets was released in Spring 2012 on the Wigmore live label. Their previous effort on that label. a disc of Mendelssohn. Mozart, and Schubert was given the BBC Music Magazine Newcomer Award in April 2010.Their debut recordingof Mendelssohn quartets for Sanctuary Classics also received wide acclaim. and their performance of the Op. 80 Quartet was chooen as "Best Recording" on BOC Radio 3's Building a Library in September 2009.They have also released a disc of French harp music with harpist Sandrine Chatron for the French label Ambroisie and Goehr's Piono Quintet with Daniel Becker for Meridian Records. In addition. they made a recording of Britten quartets, released by Sonimage.

103 Brooklyn Rider
Béla Anton Leoš Fleck is named after three classical composers: the Hungarian Béla Bartók and the Czech composers Antonin Dvorák and Leoš Janácek. Known for his wicked banjo playing, he has been pushing the boundaries of the instrument for over 30 years. He performs his new quintet for banjo and string quartet with Brooklyn Rider, a group at home in both clubs and concert halls with appearances in venues as varied as Joe’s Pub, the Library of Congress, the SXSW Festival, and UMS’s Chamber Arts Series. The members of Brooklyn Rider are part of Yo-Yo Ma’s Silk Road Ensemble, and their “down-to-earth demeanor…demystifies contemporary classical music and invites everyone into the tent.”
Hailed as the future of chamber music" by Strings magazine, BROOKLYN RIDER offers eclectic repertoire in gripping performances that continue to attract legions of fans and draw rave reviews from classical world and rock critics alike. The 2013-14 season sees Brooklyn Rider collaborate with banjo legend Bela Fleck on the Deutsche Grammophon / Mercury Classics album The Impostor and on a 20-city North American tour. Other season highlights include collaborations with soprano Dawn Upshaw at residencies at the University of Texas at Austin and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in March. and the eighth season of the Stillwater Music Festival a weeklong chamber festival in Minnesota founded by the group in 2006 as a place to unveil new repertoire and collaborations.The quartet has been increasingly active in the recording studio, including the 2013 release A Walking Fire on Mercury Classics and the much-praised Brooklyn Rider Ploys Philip Glass on the composer's Orange Mountain Music label. Violinist Johnny Gandelsman launched In A Circle Records in 2008 with the release of Brooklyn Rider's eclectic debut recording Passport, followed by Dominont Curve in 2010, and Seven Steps in 2012. A long-standing relationship between Brooklyn Rider and Kayhan Kalhor resulted in the critically acclaimed 2008 recording, Silent City.

104 NT - Collaborators
This new play by John Hodge (screenwriter of Trainspotting, Shallow Grave, and The Beach) centers on an imaginary encounter between Joseph Stalin and the playwright Mikhail Bulgakov (best known for his novel The Master and Margarita). Stars Alex Jennings (The Habit of Art) as Bulgakov and Simon Russell Beale (London Assurance) as Stalin.

105 The Tallis Scholars
The Tallis Scholars add a new dimension to UMS’s 11/12 focus on artistic renegades, presenting music of the wealthy Italian prince Carlo Gesualdo. Gesualdo’s infamy relates to his obsessive double murder of his wife and her lover, but he was also a maverick Renaissance composer whose eccentric approach to creating music — and whose colorful life story — inspired both Nadia Boulanger and Igor Stravinsky several hundred years later. His music contains wild gesticulations and abrupt surprises, and contemporary Renaissance scholars now regard him as perhaps the most forward-thinking, expressive, and sensual composer of his time. Consumed by guilt after murdering his wife, Gesualdo devoted himself to composing church music. At the centerpiece of this program is the Tenebrae Responses for Holy Saturday, part of the liturgy for the final three days of Holy Week. Works by other “maverick” Renaissance composers round out the program.

106 Brahms's Requiem
A year after his mother died, Johannes Brahms began to compose a requiem in the German language; within three years, the work had grown from a choral piece into a cantata, and then a seven-movement Requiem for chorus, orchestra, and soprano and bass soloists. It is now considered one of his pinnacle works. Unlike other Requiems, the Brahms work was not composed as a mass for the dead, but rather as a consolation for those left behind. The UMS Choral Union and Ann Arbor Symphony Orchestra perform this momentous work for the first time in over a decade under the leadership of UMS Choral Union music director Jerry Blackstone.
The single largest sacred work Brahms ever wrote (indeed his largest work in any medium), the German Requiem, follows no pre- existent musical genre. Indeed there were no known precedents for a multi-movement choral work based on Biblical excerpts freely chosen by the composer. Despite its title, the work is not strictly speaking a Requiem - a setting of the Mass of the Dead which, in the Latin original, begins with the words "Requiem aeternam." Rather, Brahms's work is a meditation on death and mortality that is both timeless and intensely personal.
As we have seen. the theme of the second movement “Denn alles Fleisch es ist wie Gras" (For all flesh is as grass) was the earliest musical idea to find its way into the Requiem. This theme bears a strong resemblance to the chorale "Wer nur den lieben Gott lasst walten" (They Who Leave All to God) found in several of Bach's cantatas and organ works. In more subtle ways. individual fragments of the chorale and its general melodic outline inform many of the work's movements. It was Brahms himself who pointed this out to the conductor Siegfried Ochs. The text of the chorale amplifies the idea of mortality expressed in Brahms's work. Brahms must have remembered that Schumann had quoted the same chorale melody in one of his songs (the shortest he ever wrote) “Anfangs wollt'ich fast verzagen" (I almost despaired at first) on a poem by Heine (No. 8 in Liederkreis. Op. 24). The words of this song are worth remembering: "I almost despaired at first and thought I would never bear it. I have borne it just the same - only ask me not how: Due to this web of quotations and references. the theme "Denn alles Fleisch" seems strikingly familiar even at first hearing.

107 Los Angeles Guitar Q
The Los Angeles Guitar Quartet is one of the most multifaceted groups in any genre. Comprised of four uniquely accomplished musicians who bring a new energy to the concert stage with programs ranging from bluegrass to Bach, they consistently play to sold-out houses worldwide. Their inventive, critically acclaimed transcriptions of concert masterworks provide a fresh look at the music of the past, while their interpretations of works from the contemporary and world music realms continually break new ground. They return to Ann Arbor for the first time since 2007.
The Grammy Award-winning LOS ANGELES GUITAR QUARTET (LAGQ) is one of the most multifaceted groups in any genre. The LAGQ is comprised of four uniquely accomplished musicians, bringing a new energy to the concert stage with programs ranging from bluegrass to Bach. They consistently play to sold-out houses world-wide. Their inventive, critically acclaimed transcriptions of concert masterworks provide a freshlook at the music of the past while their interpretations of works from the contemporary and world-music realms continually break new ground. Programs including Latin. African Far East Irish. folk. and American classics transport listeners around the world in a single concert experience. Their Don Quixote collaboration with Firesign Theater veteran actor Philip Proctor continues to expand and delight audiences. and the work SHIKI: Seasons ofJapan, written for the LAGQ plus guitar orchestra by composer Shingo Fujii, is connecting communities across the nation.Winner of a 2005 Grammy Award their Guitar Heroes CD released on Telarc is a brilliant follow-up to their Grammy-nominated LAGQ: Latin. Spin (Telarc 2006) continues their explorations of jazz and contemporary music. LAGQ: BRAZIL (Telarc 2007), including collaborations with vocalist Luciana Souza was released to rave reviews, and their newest recording of the Rodrigo Concierto Andaluz and Sergio Assad's Interchange, written specifically for them, was released on Telarc in spring 2010, and quickly climbed to top spot on the Billboard charts.The live DVD of The Ingenious Gentleman: Don Quixote was released on the Mel Bay label in spring 2012.

108 NT - War Horse
High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
Based on Michael Morpurgo’s novel and adapted for the stage by Nick Stafford, War Horse takes audiences on an extraordinary journey from the fields of rural Devon to the trenches of First World War France. With its stirring musical score, this powerfully moving and imaginative drama is a show of phenomenal inventiveness. At its heart are astonishing life-size puppets by South Africa’s Handspring Puppet Company, who bring breathing, galloping, charging horses to thrilling life on stage.

109 Cheikh Lo
Cheikh Lô is one of the great mavericks of African music. A superb singer and songwriter, as well as a distinctive guitaristand drummer, he has personalized and distilled a variety of influences from West and Central Africa to create a style that is uniquely his own. Lô dedicates both his life and music to Bave Fall, a specifically Senegalese form of Islam and part of the larger Islamic brotherhood of Mouridism, which emerged at the end of the 19th century from opposition to French colonialism. Bave Fall is distinguished visually by patchwork clothes and long dreadlocks that lead some to confuse it with Rastafarianism. Born to Senegalese parents in Burkina Faso near the Malian border, Lô was interested in music from an early age, running away from school to teach himself guitar and percussion on borrowed instruments. As a teenager, he was influenced by Cuban music, which was all the rage in West Africa at the time. After emigrating to Paris and then returning to Senegal in the late 1980s, Lô attracted both the attention of and comparisons to Youssou N’Dour, who produced two of his early albums. His signature sound, based on the popular national mbalax style, was an instant success in Senegal and prompted rave reviews on his European tour: “a compelling performer with energy and personality to match that of the early Bob Marley.” (The Guardian, London) More recently, Lô has immersed himself in the Dakar scene, and his return home is reflected in his new album, Jamm. His signature blend of semi-acoustic flavors — West and Central African, funk, Cuban, flamenco — has been distilled into his most mature, focused, yet diverse statement today, with his husky, sensual voice sounding better than ever. At 21 he started singing and playing percussion with Orchestra Volta Jazz in Bobo Dioulasso. The band played a variety of music from Burkina Faso and its neighboring countries as well as Cuban and other styles. In 1981 he moved to Dakar, Senegal where he played drums for the renowned and progressive singer, Ouza, before joining the house band at the Hotel Savana, drumming and singing an international repertoire.In 1984 he moved to Paris and worked as a studio session drummer. On his return to Senegal he found that his dreadlocks no longer made him entirely welcome at the Hotel Savana so he concentrated on his own music.
Cheikh's first cassette Doxandeme (Immigrants), on which he sang about the experience of being Senegalese abroad, was released in 1990. It sold well and earned him the Nouveau Talent award in Dakar. The following year he started to work on the compositions for his album A/e La Thiass.
L6 continued to develop his own repertoire. On hearing Lo's new songs, N'Dour immediately agreed to produce the album and in August 1995 they went to work in Youssou's Xippi Studio in Dakar on the album A/e La Thiass.The album sees L6 joined on vocals by Youssou N'Dour and by musicians from N'Dour's Super Etoile de Dakar. Lo's signature sound a semi acoustic, Spanish-tinged take on the popular mbalax style was an instant success in Senegal, gaining him a dedicated local following. "Set," a plea to clean up the streets during a Dakar municipal strike, was broadcast on loudspeakers throughout the country in a campaign by the Ministry of Health.A/e La Thiass was released internationally on World Circuit in 1996 followed by his debut tour in Europe with his own band. His early performances prompted rave reviews wherever he performed.In 1997 L6 was awarded "Best Newcomer" at the Kora All-African Awards in South Africa and the following year he toured the US as part of the Africa-Fete line-up that included Salif Keita and Papa Wemba. In 1999 he received the prestigious Ordre National de Merite de Leon from the Presi- dent of Senegal.Following the release of Lamp Fall (2005), L6 withdrew from the international stage and immersed himself in the Dakar scene playing regularly with his own band and this return home is reflected in his new album Jamm. His signature blend of semi-acoustic flavors West and Central African, Cuban, and flamenco has been distilled into his most mature, focused, yet diverse statement to date.

110 Dave Holland
A bassist, composer, band leader and a master of time and rhythm, Dave Holland is in his fifth decade as a performer, and his music possesses a rich and kaleidoscopic history.
A seminal figure in post-1960s jazz, Dave Holland has never allowed his work to be limited by tradition. A master of tone and rhythm, the bassist, composer, and bandleader is now in his fifth decade as a performer, and his music possesses a rich and kaleidoscopic history. His path has led him from the frontiers of free improvisation to his modern ensembles that fully embody the Sam Rivers-instilled philosophy of “playing all of it.” The Wolverhampton, England, native got his big break from Miles Davis, with whom he played during the epochal Bitches Brew period. He formed his first working quintet in 1983 and continued to develop fruitful relationships with artists such as Anthony Braxton, Stan Getz, Cassandra Wilson, Jack DeJohnette, Chick Corea, Joe Henderson, Thelonious Monk, Betty Carter, Pat Metheny, Kenny Wheeler, Bill Frisell, Roy Haynes, and Herbie Hancock over the course of his career. This performance with his 13-piece big band is Dave Holland’s third appearance since his 2003 UMS debut. “One of the very best working bands in jazz.”
A master of tone and rhythm, the bassist, composer, and bandleader DAVE HOLLAND is now in his fifth decade as a performer, and his music possesses a rich and kaleidoscopic history. His path has led him from the frontiers of free improvisation to his modern ensembles that fully embody the Sam Rivers-instilled philosophy of "playing all of it." Mr. Holland got his big break from Miles Davis at the fabled Soho jazz club Ronnie Scott's in London in 1968 and he quickly joined Davis's bands for recording and touring around the world.Mr. Holland became a dominant voice in the 19705, partnering with Rivers and working with folk and rock musicians such as Bonnie Raitt and John Hartford. (He even had a passing encounter with Jimi Hendrix.) He formed his first working quintet in 1983, and released jumpin' In on ECM Records, and continued to develop other varied and fruitful relationships with a vast range of his peers including Anthony Braxton, Stan Getz, Cassandra Wilson, jack DeJohnette, Chick Corea, joe Henderson, Thelonious Monk, Betty Carter, Pat Metheny, Kenny Wheeler, Bill Frisell, Roy Haynes, and Herbie Hancock over the course of his career.Mr, Holland has only gathered momentum with the new century, In 2005, he formed Dare2 Records, after a 34-year relationship with ECM Records, the label where he became a signature artist, Sharing the bandstand with the best of a younger generation of players, he has recently released several albums on Dare2, including the Grammy Award-winning Overtime (2005) featuring the Dave Holland Big Band,With his third appearance at UMS since 2003, Dave Holland is joined by his Big Band and their rich, lively, and utterly kinetic sound,

111 Gabriel Kahane
Writing and performing music that moves effortlessly from dense modernism to spare vernacular song, pianist, composer, and singer Gabriel Kahane has established himself as a leading voice among a generation of young indie composers redefining music for the 21st century. Kahane performs with a variety of influential artists, including Chris Thile, Brad Mehldau, cellist Alisa Weilerstein, and his father, the noted pianist and conductor Jeffrey Kahane. He has also written the music and lyrics for February House, which ran at New York City’s Public Theater in 2012.
New to UMS, but not to Ann Arbor (he has performed at the Kerrytown Concert House), Kahane will be performing songs from his latest album, Where Are The Arms, along with material drawn from his diverse songbook and musical theater compositions. He performs with friends and collaborators yMusic, featuring guitarist/violinist Rob Moose (Bon Iver, Antony and the Johnsons) and trumpet player CJ Camerieri (Sufjan Stevens, American Composers Orchestra).
GABRIEL KAHANE is a songwriter, singer, pianist. composer, devoted amateur cook. guitarist and occasional banjo player. This year, he made his recital debut at Carnegie's Zankel Hall in a program devoted to his music. As a songwriter, he has released two albums, most recently the critically acclaimed Where are the Arms. hailed by The New York Times for its "extravagantpoise and emotional intelligence".As a composer of concert works. Mr. Kahane has been commissioned by Carnegie HaU the Los Angeles Philharmonic. American Composers Orchestra Kronos Quartet. The Caramoor Festival and Orpheus Chamber Orchestra with whom he tours this coming spring performing a new song cycle about the WPA. Other appearances this season include performances of his orchestral song cycle Crane Palimpsest with the Alabama and Waterloo-Cedar Falls symphonies, a recital with Timo Andres at the library of Congress. and this week's two-night stand at UMS with the new music ensembleyMusic.Equally at home in divergent musical realms. Mr. Kahane has performed or recorded with artists ranging from Sufjan Stevens. Rufus Wainwright Qu-is Thile, and Brad Mehldau to Jeremy Denk. Alisa Weilerstein, and composer/conductor John Adams.The original cast recording of his musical Februazy House, which received its world premiere production at New York's Public Theater in May 2012. has just been released on the StorySound labeLA fellow of both the MacDowell Colony and Yaddo. Mr. Kahane makes his home in the historic Ditmas Park district of Brooklyn. New York. where he can often be found braising unctuous cuts of meat or stumbling through transcriptions of Mahler symphonies on his century-old piano.

112 Suzhou Kun Troupe
A collection of scenes from Kunqu, the Classical Opera of Globalized China.
In 2001, UNESCO declared kunqu, the 600-year-old grand opera of China, a “Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.” The declaration not only affirms the artistic and cultural distinctions of the genre, which is known for its perfect blending of dramatic literature, soulful singing, and elegant dancing, but also creates a context for its revival in contemporary and globalized China. The genre is now enjoying a revival, attracting audiences inside and outside China with performances that judiciously blend classical stories and performance practices with contemporary staging interpretations and technologies. Kunqu is recognized internationally for being both authentic and yet fresh and updated. In its own way, it is similar to the Royal Shakespeare Company’s fresh, yet authentic, interpretations of classical English plays.
To experience kunqu is to encounter artistic and classical China interpreted for the globalized present.
To experience kunqu is to see Chinese characters/roles, historical and contemporary, come alive on stage, revealing their Chinese emotions and values.

113 Ensemble Basiani
Ensemble Basiani was created in 2000 with the blessing of Ilia II - Catholicos Patriarch of All Georgia.
UMS is pleased to introduce to Michigan audiences the highly praised all-male choral/folk music ensemble, Basiani, from the Republic of Georgia. The extraordinary program performed by Basiani is representative of Georgia’s musical heritage and comprises samples from almost every geographical region of the Republic. It is an exceptional, highly memorable performance that embraces the range and variety of Georgian folk culture and its distinctive, highly developed forms of polyphony – a central aspect of the cultural legacy that led to UNESCO’s designation in 2001 of Georgian folklore as a masterpiece of the spiritual treasury of the world’s “non-material” culture (which includes folk traditions as a bearer of cultural heritage). Basiani’s members are young singers from various parts of Georgia; most come from families of traditional singers.
Commenting on their 2010 appearance at Lincoln Center as part of a Mostly Mozart program, James Oestreich wrote in The New York Times that Basiani’s performance of “Georgian polyphony descended from an ancient tradition… stole the main show [at Alice Tully Hall]…. The ensemble, singing in close harmony, presented sacred and folk music displaying polyphonic devices ranging from simple drones to intricately interwoven melodies, which often crossed or combined to produce harmonies pungent to the Western ear.” UMS looks forward to sharing the vocal mastery of this magnificent musical ensemble in a program of discovery and revelation.
The patriarchate folk ENSEMBLE BASIANI was created in 2000 under the blessing of This holiness and beatitude IHa 11- Catholicos Patriarch of all Georgia. The Ensemble is part of the Thilisi Holy Trinity Cathedral Church choir and it participates in services conducted by the patriarch. Ensemble Basiani is comprised of singers from different parts of Georgia. Most members come from families that perform traditional singing and many members have sung folk songs in ensembles since childhood.The ensemble sings Georgian folk songs and chants by researching and reviving them from ancient phonological and notated recordings, while studying songs directly from well- known singers and conductors of elder generations active in different regions of Georgia. In just over a decade, Basiani has performed at numerous international festivals, visited 20 countries, and recorded and released seven COS.In recent years, Basiani has received international acclaim and recognition, giving performances in some of the world's most well-known concert halls and international festivals, including Auditorio Nacional de Musica (Madrid), The Gulbenkian Great Hall (Lisbon), Concertgebouw (Amsterdam), Aldeburgh Music Festival (Aldeburgh, England), and St John·s, Smith Square (London). In January 2012, Ocora Radio France released Poiyphonies vocales profanes et sacrees georgie, the most recent album recorded by Basiani.In August 2010, Basiani participated in the Lincoln Center's Mostly Mozart Festival, performing for New York audiences on a program that presented traditional Georgian polyphony along with masterpieces of J.5. Bach and other European classic composers. The event was widely lauded by the American press, including The New York Times and The Wall Street journal. The ensemble will return to New York at the conclusion of its current American tour to perform in Lincoln Center's White Light Festival."Basiani" is the name of one of the regions in Southwest Georgia (in what is now modern day Turkey. northwest of the town of Erzurum). In 1203. at this location, Georgian royal troops defeated the Turks with the victory consolidating Georgia's position in Asia Minor.

114 Jason Moran's Fats W
Pianist Jason Moran, a 2011 MacArthur “Genius” grant winner and Downbeat’s 2011 “Jazz Artist of the Year,” is jazz’s wild card, a probing conceptualist who transforms everything he touches into a bracingly contemporary statement. This lively party devoted to the legendary pianist Fats Waller (1904-1943) includes an open dance floor and copious quantities of fun. Rather than interpreting Waller’s ebulliently swinging songbook directly, Moran and the renowned bassist and vocalist Meshell Ndegeocello break down melodies and riffs, with his band “buil[ding] on those fragments, in rhythms coming out of 1960s-and-beyond dance music: Motown, house, hip-hop.”

115 Dan Zanes and Friend
Dan Zanes & Friends are releasing Little Nut Tree, the group’s first album in five years — and Ann Arbor is celebrating, with two performances by the wild, crazy, and popular ensemble that has “charged to the rescue of beleaguered parents everywhere.” (The Washington Post) Zanes’ live concerts are “a dance party hootenanny for the 21st- century” (Los Angeles Times), appealing to all ages from toddlers to grandparents. Zanes abandoned a pop music career as leader of the Del Fuegos after his daughter was born in 1994. Though she is now 16, he continues to pursue handmade family music full time, with music videos airing on “Sesame Street” and “Playhouse Disney.” Of his first CD, Rocket Ship Beach (2000), The New York Times Magazine said, “Zanes’ kids’ music works because it is not kids’ music; it’s just music — music that’s unsanitized, unpasteurized, that’s organic even.” That assessment certainly hasn’t changed over the past decade; his albums and performances are hip but accessible, bringing a multicultural, musical “mixed bag” approach that has earned Zanes his place at the forefront of the family music movement. “When I started making family music, or 21st- century all-ages social music, I wanted to try and create the updated version of the Folkways records I grew up with,” Zanes says. “They had a homespun mix of old and new songs from a variety of traditions that sounded like they were recorded on someone’s farm… Little Nut Tree is the grooviest of the Dan Zanes & Friends family series CDs — although you could still nap to it if you needed to.”
21st-century handmade all-ages family music. Dan Zanes began exploring family music after the birth of his daughter in 1994 and soon after decided to abandon a pop music career, which had included four albums with Boston's Del Fuegos, to form Festival Five Records, his decidedly independent label, and pursue family music full time. His first release Rocket Ship Beach was an immediate hit with families around America and 10 years later the Grammy Award-winning artist is known widely as the leading man of the family music genre. Among the several Parents Choice Award-winning, bestselling albums for kids and kid sympathizers are the acclaimed House Party, Night Time!, Nueva York!, and Catch That Train!, which won the 2007 Grammy Award for "Best Musical Album for Children." Music videos for Dan Zanes' songs have aired on the Noggin Network, Sesame Street, and the Disney Channel's Playhouse Disney. This fall, Dan Zanes & Friends will release Little Nut Tree, their first family album in five years. As the official follow up album to the 2007 Grammy Award-winner Catch That Train!, the new album is a return to the age-desegregated mixed musical bag approach that has earned Dan Zanes his place at the forefront of the family music genre.

116 Max Raabe
Dashing, dapper, and debonair, Max Raabe might have walked straight out of the Golden Age of Berlin in the 1920s. With his elegant poise, suave sophistication, and silky-smooth baritone, he brings to life the songs and style of a bygone age. Born into a family of farmers just as the Beatles were serving their apprenticeship in the bars and clubs of Hamburg, Raabe’s childhood musical tastes were formed by his discovery of a weekly program of 1920s music on German radio. His passion was further roused by a record he found in his parent’s cupboard: a humorous instrumental called “I’m Crazy About Hilda.” Before long, he was collecting 78s in flea markets and junk shops, and by age 16 he was an expert on the songs and styles of the Weimar era.
Raabe’s deadpan humor and charmingly meticulous re-creations of the standards as they used to be sung — in formal evening wear with an orchestra — is guaranteed to take the audience away from their everyday problems and into another world. The time has never been better to discover — or rediscover — timeless tunes by legends like Cole Porter, Irving Berlin, and Fred Astaire.
Founded in 1986 by the charismatic baritone Max Raabe, Max Raabe and Palast Orchester embodies the high style andmusical glory of the 1920s and '30s and has been performed for adoring audiences in the US, Shanghai, Paris, Berlin, Moscow, Tokyo, Vienna, Amsterdam, Rome, and Tel Aviv.
Max Raabe and his sophisticated Palast Orchester perform a mix of treasured classics, reclaimed gems, and hilariously quirky covers of modern-pop songs performed in an uber-suave cabaret style. Classically trained at the Berlin University of the Arts, Mr. Raabe knew from his early days as a student that he desired to revive a rich, musical glamour of the early 20th century, developing a vast and fantastically nuanced repertoire by scouring archives, flea markets, and curiosity shops. In true cabaret fashion, Mr. Raabe's performances are riddled with unmatched wit, fantastic word play, unbeatable timing, and a loving dash of irony; his singular ability to capture the cunning rasp of the cabaret singer, the confident bel canto hero, the oily melodiousness of the revue beau, the carefree timbre of early jazz, and the falsetto of ragtime all serve to create a performance unlike anything else offered today. On any particular evening, audiences might find themselves dreaming along to a romantic melody, wooed by his debonair wit, or enchanted by a virtuosic violin solo.
Max Raabe and Palast Orchester have earned international attention and praise. In 1997, the Palast Orchester celebrated their 10th anniversary with an audience of 20,000 at Berlin's Waldbuhne. In 2000, BMG Classics and Palast Orchester released Charming Weill, an album that paid homage to the composer Kurt Weill and was awarded the Classic Echo Award. Shortly after, their album SuperHits replaced the Beatles as the number- one album on the charts in Latvia. In 2002, the Palast Orchester had the honor of opening the Viennese Festival Weeks for an audience of 40,000, and later that year made its US debut at Royce Hall in Los Angeles. From August 2003 through 2007, the Palast Orchester performed its lavish production of Palast Revue —3 performance complete with changing scenery, a stunning chorus line, and video backdrop for more than 300,000 audience members.
In the spring of 2004, Max Raabe, along with pianist Christoph Israel, made his New York debut in two sold-out concerts at the Neue Galerie. This was followed in 2005 with Max Raabe and Palast Orchester's Carnegie Hall debut. In their annual tours to the US, the Berlin-based band continues to expand their number of performances, winning over new and enthusiastic fans in each city they visit. Their 2007 concert at Carnegie Hall was recorded and released as a live album entitled Tonight or Never, which reached Gold-status in Germany.
Recent tours in the US have included stops in Philadelphia, New York, Boston, Cleveland, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago, Pittsburgh, and Minnesota. In October 2010, Max Raabe and Palast Orchester made their Israeli debut in a national tour. In 2012, Universal Records will release One Cannot Kiss Alone in the US.

117 NT - Last of the Hau
High-Definition Broadcasts from the National Theatre, London. Presented in Partnership with the Michigan Theater.
This eagerly-anticipated new play is a funny, touching and sometimes savage portrait of a family that’s losing its grip.
Anarchic, feisty but growing old, high society drop-out Judy Haussman remains in spirit with the Ashrams of the 1960s while holding court in her dilapidated Art Deco house on the Devon coast. After an operation, she’s joined by wayward offspring Nick and Libby, sharp-eyed granddaughter Summer, local doctor Peter, and Daniel, a troubled teenager who makes use of the family’s crumbling swimming pool. Together they share a few sweltering months in this chaotic world of all-day drinking, infatuations, long-held resentments, free love and failure.

118 NT - Timon of Athens
High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
Simon Russell Beale takes the title role in Shakespeare’s strange fable of consumption, debt and ruin, written in collaboration with Thomas Middleton.
Wealthy friend to the rich and powerful, patron of the arts, ostentatious host, Timon of Athens is surrounded by free-loaders and sycophants. He vastly outspends his resources but, finding his coffers empty, reassures his loyal steward that all will be well.
When he calls upon his associates, instead of offering help, they hang him out to dry. After a final, vengeful banquet, Timon withdraws to a literal and emotional wasteland, living off roots and pouring curses on a morally bankrupt Athens.

119 NT - Traveling Ligh
A new play by Nicholas Wright
In a remote village in Eastern Europe, around 1900, the young Motl Mendl is entranced by the flickering silent images on his father's cinematograph. Bankrolled by Jacob, the ebullient local timber merchant, and inspired by Anna, the girl sent to help him make moving pictures of their village, he stumbles on a revolutionary way of story-telling. Forty years on, Motl - now a famed American film director - looks back on his early life and confronts the cost of fulfilling his dreams.
Following Vincent in Brixton and The Reporter, Nicholas Wright's new play is a funny and fascinating tribute to the Eastern European immigrants who became major players in Hollywood's golden age. The award- winning Antony Sher - whose previous work with the National Theatre includes Primo and Stanley - returns to play Jacob.

120 Colin Stetson
Born and raised in Ann Arbor, saxophonist Colin Stetson has spent the 15 years since he graduated from the University of Michigan working with dozens of artists, including Tom Waits, Feist, Laurie Anderson, Lou Reed, David Byrne, LCD Soundsystem, and Angélique Kidjo, among others. He is a current member of the indie band Bon Iver yet has developed an utterly unique voice as a soloist (principally on saxophones and clarinets). His intense technical prowess is matched by his emotionally gripping skills as a songwriter. “Stetson demolishes clichés to unleash fresh, unexpected energies. It’s like being inside an enormous brass tunnel full of windy byways and slamming valves, at once exhilarating and frightening.”
COLIN STETSON was born and raised in Ann Arbor, Michigan and spent a decade in San Francisco and Brooklyn honing his formidable talents as a horn player, working extensively live and in studio with a diverse range of artists including Tom Waits.Arcade Fire,1V OnThe Radio, Feist Laurie Anderson. Lou Reed David Byrne, Jolie Holland, Sinead O'Connor, LCD Soundsystem, The National Angelique Kidjo, and Anthony Braxton. Meanwhile he has developed an utterly unique voice as a soloist, principally on saxophones and clarinets, his intense technical prowess matched by his and emotionally gripping skills as a songwriter. He settled in Montreal in 2007.In 2008 Aagoo Records released Colin Stetson's debut, the first in his New History Warfare album cycle.New History Warfare Vol. 2: Judges arrived in spring 2011 kicking off a year of solo engagements and year-round touring as a member of the Bon Iver band.The album was met with universal acclaim from critics across a spectrum of jazz and indie rock/pop cultural spheres (“pure revelation" according to All About Jazz), was shortlisted for the Polaris Music Prize, and landed on year-end lists at Pitchfork, Tiny Mix Tapes. SPIN, and the Village Voice. His frequent appearances on stages at SXSW, All Tomorrow’s Parties. and countless stops on the international jazz festival circuit cemented his reputation as a versatile and virtuosic player while bringing his solo work to a broad international audience.
Mr. Stetson's astounding physical engagement with his instruments (chiefly bass and alto saxophones) produces emotionally rich and polyphonic compositions that transcend expectations of what solo horn performance can sound like. He is equally at home in the avant - jazz tradition of players who have pushed the boundaries of the instrument through circular breathing. embouchure, etc. (i.e. Evan Parker, Mats Gustafsson) and at the nexus of noise / drone / minimalist music that encompasses genres like dark metal post-rock. and contemporary electronics (i.e. Tim Hecker, Ben Frost- both of whom have mixed or remixed his recordings).April 2013 saw the release of New History Warfare Vol 3: To See More Light via Constellation records. completing the conceptual and narrative arc of the series and constituting a definitive realization of his unparalleled musicianship and stunning compositional skills. It has been received with exemplary recognition and was shortlisted for the Polaris Music Prize.Mr. Stetson is a graduate of the U-M School of Music Theatre & Dance where he studied with Donald Sinta.

121 Fred Hersch Trio
Proclaimed by Vanity Fair as “the most arrestingly innovative pianist in jazz over the last decade,” Fred Hersch balances his internationally recognized instrumental and improvisational skills with significant achievements as a composer, bandleader, and theatrical conceptualist. Hersch has fully lived up to the approbation of The New York Times, which praised him as “singular among the trailblazers of their art, a largely unsung innovator of this borderless, individualistic jazz — a jazz for the 21st century.”A pianist and composer FRED HERSCH has been called “one of the small handful of brilliant musicians of his generation" by Downbeat and has earned a place among the foremost jazz artists in the world today. Beginning in the late 70s as a sideman to jazz legends including Joe Henderson Art Farmer, and Stan Getz. he has solidified a reputation as a versatile master of jazz piano. as well as a relentlessly probing composer and conceptualist. He is widely recognized for his ability to steadfastly create a unique body of original works while reinventing the standard jazz repertoire - investing time-tested classics with keen insight, fresh ideas. and extraordinary technique. Whether unaccompanied in duo. working with trios and quintets, Mr. Hersch has explored the jazz tradition to its fullest even as he opens new and undiscovered doors. His numerous accomplishments include a 2003 Guggenheim Memorial Fellowship for composition, five Grammy A ward nominations for NBest Jazz Instrumental Performance" (one in 2014) and a Grammy Award nomination for "Best Instrumental Composition." He has appeared on over 100 recordings, including more than three-dozen albums as bandleader/solo pianist.Fred Hersch is considered to be the most prolific and widely praised solo jazz pianist of his generation. In 2006, Palmetto Records released the solo recordingFred Hersch in Amsterdam: Live at the Bimhuis; its release led to Mr. Hersch becoming the first pianist in the 70-year history of New York's legendary Village Vanguard to play an entire week as a solo pianist. His most recent solo recording, Alone at the Vanguard was recorded live at the legendary club. Hersch Plays Jobim (Sunnyside) was cited as one of the "Top Ten" jazz releases of 2009 by NPRand by the Wall Street Journal. In addition. he leads an award-winning trio, a quintet and has ongoing special collaborations with jazz and classical instrumentalistsand vocalists around the world. A recent project features an unconventional line-up of piano, trumpet, voice, and percussion. This ensemble is featured onThe Fred Hersch Pocket Orchestra: Live at Jazz Standard which was released in April 2009 on Sunnyside Records.
Mr. Hersch's career as a performer has been greatly enhanced by his composing activities, a vital part of nearly all of his live concerts and recordings. May 2011 saw the premiere of My Coma Dreams, a full-evening work for 11 instruments, actor / singer, and animation / multimedia. In 2003, he created Leaves of Gross (Palmetto Records), a large-scale setting of Walt Whitman's poetry for two voices (Kurt Elling and Kate McGarry) and an instrumental octet; the work was presented in March 2005 in a sold-out performance at Zankel Hall at Carnegie Hall as part of a six-city US tour that included VMS in Ann Arbor. Mr. Hersch has toured with concert pianist Christopher O'Riley and has collaborated with artists ranging from Bill Frisell Toots Thielemans. and Charlie Haden to singers Renee Fleming. Norma Winstone, and Audra McDonald. He has received commissions from The Gilmore Keyboard FestivaL The Doris Duke Foundation The Miller Theatre at Columbia University, Chamber Music America, and The Brooklyn Youth Chorus. Naxos Records has released Fred Hersch: Concert Music 2001-2006, a disc of his “classical" works.

122 One Night in Bamako
In the midst of a military coup that has brought terrible unrest to Mali, two of the country’s talents unite for a special concert. Bassekou Kouyaté is a virtuoso picker, musical visionary, and one of Africa’s greatest instrumentalists, whose work blurs the lines between West African and American roots music. His instrument, the ngoni, is an ancestor of the banjo and the key instrument of griot storytelling culture. Perpetuating Mali’s rich musical tradition, Fatoumata Diawara presents a joyous mix of the vibrant and understated, combining songs about love, politics, and empowerment. Inspired by Wassoulou tradition, jazz, and blues, she has created her own unique contemporary folk sound with a distinctly African spin, with arresting melodies soaring over intricate guitar and drum arrangements.
Building on Mali's rich musical tradition, FATOUMATA DIAWARA presents a joyous mix of the vibrant and understated. combining songs about love, politics, and empowerment with arresting melodies soaring over intricate guitar and drum arrangements. Inspired by Wassoulou tradition. jazz. and blues. Ms. Diawara has created her own unique contemporary folk sound. with a distinctly African spin to the concept of the female singer-songwriter.At the center of the music is Ms. Diawara's warm. affecting voice; spare, rhythmical guitar playing and gorgeously melodic songs that draw powerfully on her own often troubled experience. Born in Cote d'Ivoire, raised in Mall and now based in Paris. Ms. Diawara has had a life covering a whole gamut of contemporary African experience : fighting parental opposition to her artistic ambitions and the cultural prejudice faced by women throughout Africa winning success as an actress in film and theater, before finding her feet in the medium she was always destined to make her own music.
Damon Albarn. Tournani Diabate, Herbie Hancock. and Led Zeppelin's John Paul Jones are just a few of the major players who have fallen for Ms. Diawara's effortless musical charm. as her presence has lit up shows in Europe by Africa Express, AfroCubism. and Hancock's “imagine" project. Yet her recording debut released in North America on Nonesuch Records in 2012, is almost entirely her own work: self-composed and arranged with her own backing vocals and percussion. It breathes with the natural warmth. confidence, and spontaneity that are the essence of Ms. Diawara herself.

123 Alfredo Rodriguez &
A young pianist of astonishing virtuosity and imagination, Cuban-born Alfredo Rodríguez performs with the open spirit of a culture rooted in dancing. Especially evident during his live performances, Rodríguez imparts a youthful, riveting artistry that fuses Latin music and jazz in surprising and beautiful ways. Quincy Jones discovered his unique talent at the Montreux Jazz Festival in 2006, and his performances have evoked comparisons of legendary jazz pianists like Keith Jarrett, Thelonious Monk, and Bill Evans. This double-bill performance also features percussionist and vocalist Pedrito Martinez, who incorporates the folklore of his Cuban roots with religious Yoruba chants and batá melodies into the traditional clave beat of popular Latin jazz. His popularity extends to the musical scene of New York streets, where his devotion to live performance establishes itself at the restaurant Guantanamera, where he plays three times a week.
Cuban-born ALFREDO RODRIGUEZ calls up images of legendary jazz pianists like Keith Jarrett, Thelonious Monk, Art Tatum. Bill Evans. and his compatriot Chucho Valdes. Schooled in the rigorous classical conservatories of Havana Mr. Rodriguez's riveting artistry is informed as much by Bach and Stravinsky as by his Cuban andjazz roots.Discovered at the Montreux Jazz Festival in 2006 by Quincy Jones, Mr. Rodriguez's star has risen rapidly under the tutelage of the famed producer.Since arriving in the US in 2009, he has appeared on numerous prestigious stages including the Playboy Jazz Festival at the Hollywood Bowl; the Gilmore Keyboard Festival; the Detroit, Newport, San Francisco, North Sea Umbria and Vienna jazz festivals; as well as in important jazz rooms such as Ronnie Scott's. Sculler's, Yoshi's. Jazz Standard The Blue Note, and Jazz Alley. Alongside Latin piano legends Michel Camilo and Eddie Palmieri. he performed to sold-out audiences at the AT&T Center in Miami and the AT&T Center in Dallas on LaDy Rosen's record-breaking JAZZ ROOFS series.On his latest release entitled The Invasion Parade, the follow-up to his stunning debut on Mack Avenue, Sounds of Space, Alfredo Rodriguez explores his memories of Cuba the people and the culture he left behind - and finds his nE'V{place.Co-produced by Quincy Jones, Mr. Rodriguez's champion and mentor, and featuring a superb ensemble that includes bassist and vocalist Esperanza Spalding. percussionist and vocalist Pedrito Martinez. and drummer and percussionist Henry Cole, The Invasion Parade comprises nine tracks including originals by Mr. Rodriguez as well as evergreens such as “Guantanamera" Maria Teresa Vera's "Veinte Ailos: and “Quizas. Quizas, Quizas” The title The Invasion Parade refers to an annual tradition. a carnival parade in Santiago de Cuba commemorating the invasion of the Liberation Army that marked the end of Cuba's War of Independence. In this blocks-long parade, “not only comparsas (drumming and dance groups) participate but also all the people of Santiago, they come out and join playing whatever they have - drums. pots, whatever, and singing improvised lyrics," explains Mr. Rodriguez.The term “invasion" in the title, he's quick to note, “refers to the invasion of the streets by people who come out to participate and celebrate. In my mind it also has to do with an invasion of culture. I wrote and arranged the music but not everybody in the group is Cuban. We have Cubans but also Americans (such as Esperanza Spalding), a Puerto Rican (Henry Cole), a Bulgarian (bassist Peter Slavov), and it's a mix of cultures in which everybody contributes.”“The invasion of The Invasion Parade is a peaceful one, and an honest one: he says. "It's a celebration to which all are invited exactly like in the conga Santiaguera. That's the message we want to send out.”

124 Beijing Guitar Duo
Meng Su and Yameng Wang are widely noted for their outstanding technique and artistic musicality. They first met as children at the Central Conservatory in Beijing, where they studied with the acclaimed professor Chen Zhi. Both women have won the Tokyo International Guitar Competition (Yameng Wang won it at age 12), and have received heaps of acclaim and recognition at international guitar events and from other seasoned guitarists, including Sergio Assad who has written and dedicated works to them. In 2008, they went to study with Manuel Barrueco at the Peabody Conservatory of Music in Baltimore and officially established themselves as the Beijing Guitar Duo. Their impressive talents come together to create one of the most exciting guitar duos on the scene today. Manuel Barrueco joins them for this debut performance, which will feature both individual and ensemble work for classical guitar. “It was clear from the evening that both women are incredibly gifted, and together, with their ability to fuse technical skill effortlessly with their depth of musicality, they have the star potential to serve as inspiration for new generations of guitarists to come.” (Classical Guitar)
Comprised of Meng Su and Yameng Wang, the Beijing Guitar Duo first met at the Central Conservatory in Beijing, China, where they both studied with the acclaimed professor Chen Zhi. The Beijing Guitar Duo was formally established at the encouragement of Manuel Barrueco, their teacher and mentor, while pursuing their advanced studies at the Peabody Conservatory of Music in Baltimore, Maryland.The impressive individual talents of Meng Su and Yameng Wang come together to create what has become one of the most exciting guitar duos today. As recipients of the "Solomon H. Snyder Award," the Beijing Guitar Duo made its New York debut at Carnegie Hall's Weill Recital Hall with critical acclaim. The current concert season takes them to guitar centers in countries such as Holland, Germany, Ireland, Finland, Croatia, China, and the US; in addition, they will perform in trio with Manuel Barrueco in Germany, Finland, and in the US. Their first duo recording, Maracaipe, received a Latin Grammy Award nomination for the featured work Maracaipe, written and dedicated to them by composer Sergio Assad. Their second recording was released this past October and includes Scarlatti Sonatas, the Chaconne by Bach, Sonatina Canonica by Castelnuovo-Tedesco, Valses Poeticos by Granados, and the world-premiere recording of Tan Dun's Eight Memories in Watercolor in an arrangement for two guitars.

125 NT - One Man, Two Gu
Based on Goldoni’s The Servant of Two Masters (which UMS presented in the 05/06 season with Piccolo Teatro di Milano), Richard Bean’s One Man, Two Guvnors is directed by National Theatre artistic director Nicholas Hytner. Starring James Corden, this entertaining comedy is set in 1963 Brighton (UK), with sex, food, and money high on the agenda. Early reviews in London hailed it as “one of the funniest productions in the National’s history” (Daily Telegraph) and “the feel-good hit of the summer.” (The Telegraph) This production has already sold out every performance through September in London.
British playwright Richard Bean's comedy One Man, Two Guvnors adapts the 18th century commedia dell'arte work The Servant of Two Masters to tell the tale of manservant Francis Henshall, who agrees to work for a local gangster and a criminal in hiding but struggles to keep track of their schemes and romantic entanglements. The cast recording features all 15 of the play's songs, performed by director Nicholas Hytner's frequent collaborator, composer/lyricist Grant Olding, and house band the Craze along with the original National Theatre cast. Set in swinging '60s England when rock, pop, and jazz mingled, music was an important component to the production, which paid homage to the Kinks ("The Ballad of Ted and Calista," "Strung Out Dolly") and Woody Guthrie ("My Old Man's a Gannet"), and also employed skiffle-style unexpected musical instruments (bicycle horns, washboards) and found objects (a fellow actor's torso).

126 NT - Frankenstein
For the third year, UMS and the Michigan Theater bring these high-definition screenings of live theater broadcasts by the National Theatre, London. The broadcasts feature plays produced by the National Theatre on cinema screens worldwide. In the US, the “live” screenings are delayed to accommodate the time difference. Broadcasts feature behind-the-scenes footage and interviews with actors.
A new play by Nick Dear based on the novel by Mary Shelley.
Oscar-winner Danny Boyle (127 Hours, Slumdog Millionaire) returned to the theatre to direct this visionary production with Benedict Cumberbatch and Jonny Lee Miller. It will return to cinemas worldwide from June for a limited season of encore screenings. Benedict Cumberbatch and Jonny Lee Miller alternate the roles of Victor Frankenstein and the Creature in two electrifying broadcasts.
Childlike in his innocence but grotesque in form, Frankenstein's bewildered creature is cast out into a hostile universe by his horror-struck maker. Meeting with cruelty wherever he goes, the friendless Creature, increasingly desperate and vengeful, determines to track down his creator and strike a terrifying deal.
Urgent concerns of scientific responsibility, parental neglect, cognitive development and the nature of good and evil are embedded within this thrilling and deeply disturbing classic gothic tale.
Wednesday, June 6 - Jonny Lee Miller as The Creature and Benedict Cumberbatch as Victor Frankenstein
Thursday, June 7 - Benedict Cumberbatch as The Creature and Jonny Lee Miller as Victor Frankenstein

127 NT - The Kitchen
In the kitchen of an enormous West End restaurant in 1950s London, the orders are piling up: a post-war feast of soup, fish, cutlets, omelets, and fruit flans. Thrown together by their work, chefs, waitresses, and porters from across Europe — English, Irish, German, Jewish — argue and flirt as they race to keep up. Peter, a high-spirited young cook, seems to thrive on the pressure. In between preparing dishes, he manages to strike up an affair with a married waitress while dreaming of a better life. But in the all-consuming clamor of the kitchen, nothing is far from the brink of collapse. Arnold Wesker’s extraordinary play premiered at the Royal Court in 1959. It features an ensemble of 30 people and is set in a kitchen, using real food and actors actually cooking and preparing food on stage. This tour-de-force spectacle is a blackly funny and furious examination of life lived at breakneck speed, when work threatens to define who we are.

128 NT - The Comedy of E
Dominic Cooke, director of the Royal Court Theatre in London, comes to the National for the first time to direct Shakespeare’s The Comedy of Errors. UK comedian and actor Lenny Henry makes his National Theatre debut as Antipholus of Syracuse.

129 Mavericks All Access
As part of its centennial season, Michael Tilson Thomas and the San Francisco Symphony will present its second American Mavericks Festival, which will tour in its entirety to only two US venues: Hill Auditorium and Carnegie Hall. The 2012 festival celebrates the creative pioneering spirit and the composers who created a new American musical voice for the 20th century and beyond. These concerts will examine the music of iconoclastic, revolutionary composers championed by MTT and the SFS, such as John Cage, Morton Feldman, Carl Ruggles, Edgard Varèse, and Charles Ives, and expand the maverick roster through commissions by Bay Area composers John Adams and Mason Bates. Concerts will feature performances by longtime SFS collaborators Jessye Norman, Emanuel Ax, Meredith Monk, Jeremy Denk, and the St. Lawrence String Quartet, among others.
This final concert of the four-concert American Mavericks residency features 17 musicians from the San Francisco Symphony performing chamber music. American mavericks explored every sound that a full orchestra could make, but they also composed fascinating, and invigorating, chamber music. This concert features intriguing chamber works from composers whose music will shape the decades to come.
The San Francisco Symphony (SFS), which celebrates its centennial this season, gave its first concertsin December 1911. Its music directors have included Henry Hadley, Alfred Hertz, Basil Cameron, Issay Dobrowen, Pierre Monteux, Enrique Jorda, Josef Krips, Seiji Ozawa, Edode Waart, Herbert Blomstedt, and, since 1995, Michael Tilson Thomas. The SFS has won such recording awards as France's Grand Prix du Disque, Britain's Gramophone Award, and US Grammy Awards. For RCA Red Seal, Michael Tilson Thomas and the SFS have recorded music from Prokofiev'5 Romeo andJuliet, Berlioz's Symphonie fantastique, two Copland collections, a Gershwin collection, Stravinsky ballets (Le Sacre du printemps, The Firebird, and Persephone), and Charles Ives: An American Journey. Their cycle of Mahler symphonies has received seven Grammy Awards and is available on the Symphony's own label, SFS Media. Some of the most important conductors of the past and recent years have been guests on the SFS podium, among them Bruno Walter, Leopold Stokowski, Leonard Bernstein, and Sir Georg Solti, and the list of composers who have led the Orchestra includes Stravinsky, Ravel, Copland, and John Adams. The SFSYouth Orchestra, founded in 1980, has become known around the world, as has the SFS Chorus, heard on recordings and on the soundtracks of such films as Amadeus and Godfather III. For two decades, the SFSAdventures in Music program has brought music to every child in grades one through five in San Francisco's public schools. SFS radio broadcasts, the first in the US to feature symphonic music when they began in 1926, today carry the Orchestra's concerts across the country.

130 NT - People
High-Definition Broadcasts from the National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
A new play by Alan Bennett
Nicholas Hytner, director
Award-winning writer Alan Bennett is reunited with director Nicholas Hytner and Olivier Award-winning actress Frances de la Tour, with whom he worked on The History Boysand The Habit of Art.
People spoil things; there are so many of them and the last thing one wants is them traipsing through one’s house. But with the park a jungle and a bath on the billiard table, what is one to do? Dorothy (Frances de la Tour) wonders if an attic sale could be a solution.

131 NT - This House
High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
A new play by James Graham
Jeremy Herrin, director
It’s 1974 and the corridors of Westminster ring with the sound of infighting and backbiting as Britain’s political parties battle to change the future of the nation, whatever it takes. In this hung parliament, the ruling party holds on by a thread. Votes are won and lost by one, fist fights erupt in the bars, and ill MPs are hauled in to cast their votes. James Graham’s biting and energetic new play strips politics down to the practical realities of those behind the scenes who roll up their sleeves, on occasion bending the rules, to maneuver a diverse and conflicting chorus of MPs within the Mother of all Parliaments.

132 NT - The Curious Inc
High-Definition Broadcasts from the National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
Mark Haddon’s celebrated, multi-award-winning novel is beautifully and imaginatively adapted into a stage play for the first time.
Christopher, fifteen years old, stands beside Mrs Shears’ dead dog, Wellington. It has been speared with a garden fork, it is seven minutes after midnight and Christopher is under suspicion. He records each fact in his book to solve the mystery. He has an extraordinary brain, exceptional at maths but ill-equipped to interpret everyday life. He has never ventured alone beyond the end of his road, he detests being touched and he distrusts strangers. But his detective work, forbidden by his father, takes him on a frightening journey that upturns his world.
Running Time: 2 ½ hours including one 20-minute intermission.

133 NT - Coriolanus
"High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater. National Theatre Live will broadcast the Donmar Warehouse’s production of Coriolanus, Shakespeare’s searing tragedy of political manipulation and revenge. When an old adversary threatens Rome, the city calls once more on her hero and defender: Coriolanus. But he has enemies at home, too. Famine threatens the city, the citizens’ hunger swells to an appetite for change, and on returning from the field Coriolanus must confront the march of realpolitik and the voice of an angry people."
Discounted tickets for UMS Subscribers and Donors as well as Michigan Theater Members are available. Please call 734-764-2538 to purchase your tickets and receive that benefit.

134 Steve Lehman Octet
Steve Lehman is a “quietly dazzling saxophonist” (The New York Times) who works across a broad spectrum of experimental musical idioms. His pieces have been performed by the International Contemporary Ensemble and So Percussion, among others, and his 2009 recording Travail, Transformation & Flow was chosen as the “#1 Jazz/Pop Album of the Year” by The New York Times. This visionary composer is creating powerful new models for improvisation and leads his Octet in this UMS debut.
Described as None of the transforming figures of early- 21st-century jazz” and as “a dazzling saxophonist,” STEVE LEHMAN (b. New York City, 1978) is a composer, performer, educator, and scholar who works across a broad spectrum of experimental musical idioms. Mr. Lehman's pieces for large orchestra and chamber ensembles have been performed by the International Contemporary Ensemble (ICE), So Percussion, Kammerensemble Neue Musik Berlin. the JACK Quartet and the Talea Ensemble. His recent recording. Travail, Transformation & Flow (Pi 2009) was chosen as the “#1 Jazz Album of the Year”.An alto saxophonist Mr. Lehman has performed and recorded nationally and internationally with his own ensembles and with those led by Anthony Braxton. Dave Burrell. Dave Douglas Mark Dresser, Vijay Iyer, Oliver Lake, Jason Moran. Meshell Ndegeocello, and High Priest of Anti-Pop Consortium. His recent electro-acoustic music has focused on the development of computer-driven models for improvisation based in the Max/MSP programming environment Mr. Lehman's work has been favorably reviewed.
Steve Lehman has published writings and presented lectures on a wide range of topics, including jazz pedagogy, rhythm cognition, and European notions of American experimentalism. His current scholarship, including a contribution to Arcana VI (Hips Road / Tzadik) and his recent doctoral dissertation, examines the overlapping histories of spectral music and jazz improvisation.Mr. Lehman received his BA (2000) and master's in composition (2002) from Wesleyan University where he studied under Anthony Braxton, Jay Hoggard and Alvin Lucier, while concurrently working with Jackie McLean at the Hartt School of Music. He received his doctorate with distinction in music composition from Columbia University (2012), where his principal teachers included Tristan Murail and George Lewis.

135 Asif Ali Khan
If the late, great Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan (1948-97) was known as “the emperor of Qawwali,” Asif Ali Khan — who was once hailed by the maestro as one of his best students — has surely emerged as the music’s reigning prince. Asif is a superstar in his native Pakistan and a powerful figure on the international stage, remaining faithful to the sublime traditions of devotional Sufi music. His music can be meditative and trance-inducing, before, at a turn, becoming thrilling and ecstatic. To hear his voice soaring above the call-and-response choruses, rhythmic hand claps, percussion, and harmonium of his accompanying musicians is an inspiring experience whether you’re an adherent of the Sufi faith or not.
ASIF ALI KHAN was born in 1973. the youngest son of Manzoor Hussain. a well-knowm singer from a famous Pakistani musical family. He traces his musical ancestry back more than 350 years. His great-grandfather, Mian Maula Baksh, was one of the most famous classical singers of the Indian subcontinent and founded his qawwali (Sufi music) group more than 80 years ago.After partition. his grandfather, Santoo Khan moved the family to Pakistan in 1947 settling in Lahore. Here the group, known at this time as Santoo Khan Qawwal became extremely popular both for its wide repertoire of classical. spiritual (Sufi) and popular songs as well as their superb command of the Urdu. Persian. and Punjabi languages. The group was one of the first to record qawwali music and was regularly heard on All Pakistan Radio.
Santoo Khan died in the late 1980s whereupon his son Manzoor Hussain took over the leadership. By this time, all seven of his sons, including Asif Ali, were performing with the group. From his early days as a teenager, Mr. Khan was praised for his outstanding vocal qualities.In the early 1990s, his father introduced him to the legendary Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan who was acknowledged as Pakistan's greatest qawwali singer of the 20th century. Asif Ali's impeccable diction. brilliant inventiveness, and sincerity inured him to the master. He became Nusrat's premier student in 1995, and within a short while, took over the vocal leadership for the group from hisfather . In 1999, he was elected "Best Young Pakistani Qawwali" by Lok Versa While continuing to offer his singing at religious shrines throughout Pakistan, he has embarked on numerous concert tours in Europe, Asia Australia and the Middle East over the past 1O years.
He was first invited to Europe in 2002 when he performed at the prestigious Festivalles Orientales in St. Florent le Viell, in western France. In 2004, he returned to Europe to perform at the Kunst Palast Museum in Dusseldorf. Germany and the Cite de la Musique, Paris. In 2005, he embarked on a major European tour performing in Holland Portugal Switzerland. Spain. and six cities in France. including Paris where he performed to a capacity audience at the Institut du Mende Arabe. Another European tour in 2008 brought him to major festivals in France, Luxembourg. Belgium. Holland Austria Slovenia and Italy.In 2011 he appeared at WOMEX in Copenhagen and. in 2012. he performed in Istanbul Shanghai. Australia and at the Olympic Games in London. His huge popularity brought him back to Europe in 2013 when he was invited to perform at the WOMAD festivals in London and Moscow and major festivals in Portugal. Belgium France. and Germany.Since the death of the world famous Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan in 1997, there have been many contenders to inherit his place as "Emperor of Qawwali" There is no doubt nOV{ that Asif Ali Khan has emerged as the one of the genre's reining princes. While remaining hue to the Punjabi tradition that was Nusrat's hallmark, he has developed a style and presence all of his own.

136 DC: Hubbard
Hubbard Street Dance Chicago returns for a one-night-only program featuring choreography by William Forsythe. Raised in New York, Forsythe had a 20-year tenure as director of Ballett Frankfurt before starting his own company in Germany. He is one of the choreographers who changed ballet from its identification with 19th-century classical repertoire to a more dynamic, 21st-century art form. The program will include Quintett, Forsythe’s tribute to his wife, who died of cancer at the age of 32; N.N.N.N., a piece for four men; and One Flat Thing, reproduced, inspired by the risk and adventure of Robert Scott’s arctic expeditions, during which explorers relied on each other for survival.One Flat Thing is performed via performed within the confines of a tightly-spaced set of tables, a thrilling sequence of team choreography that runs dangerously close to reckless abandon.
What Makes It Renegade? William Forsythe is a true post-modernist dance maker who has defiantly turned ballet’s orientation away from its 19th-century traditions toward the future by embracing forward-looking aesthetic ideas — dance, voice, text, sound, visual art, and anything else at hand — to create trans-disciplinary works.

137 FAM -Aspen Santa Fe
“Simply breathtaking,” proclaims the Chicago Sun-Times about Aspen Santa Fe Ballet, whose UMS debut features a program of contemporary ballet that exemplifies the company’s commitment to commissioning dance by both world-renowned and emerging choreographers. With a European aesthetic grounded in American sensibilities, this 11-member troupe of classically trained dancers has developed a worldwide following. “Stark, sleek, and chock-full of moves that skirt the edges of contemporary movement.” (The Boston Globe)
Aspen Santa Fe Ballet began in Aspen in 1996, and a partnership four years later led to the creation of a company that splits its time between Aspen and Santa Fe. Artistic director Tom Mossbrucker, a former principal dancer with the Joffrey Ballet, has been with the company since the beginning. He is dedicated to presenting an eclectic repertoire and committed to acquiring new works that persistently challenge, enliven, and education both audiences and the company dancers.
In 1996 ASPEN SANTA FE BALLET Founder Bebe Schweppe invited Tom Mossbrucker and jean-Philippe Malaty to create a ballet company in Aspen. A unique multidimensional arts organization developed rapidly from the ballet school Schweppe had established in the Rocky Mountains. "Bebe's vision for Aspen to have its own ballet company was the project of a lifetime," says Malaty, ASFB's executive director. "We embarked together on a serendipitous adventure. Sixteen years later. the connection between the dancers and our two communities is deep and inextricable."
ASFB's mission has always placed highest priority on developing new choreographyand nurturing relationships with emerging choreographers, The company fostered the early careers of key global dance makers such as Nicolo Fonte (10 commissioned Fonte works in the ASFB repertoire), Jorma Elo (four commissioned Elo works), Edwaard Liang, Jacopo Godani, Helen Pickett, and others, Works by late-20th-century masters - William Forsythe, Jiri Kyliim, Twyla Tharp, and Paul Taylor - round out the repertoire, "For us it's never been about the single work, It's the relationship we build with our choreographers; they become part of the fabric of the company, The natural beauty of our surroundings has a profound impact on creativity, and our choreographers find it inspiring to create here; says Mossbrucker, ASFB's artistic director.ASFB's sophisticated repertoire combines well with the co-directors' desire to entertain audiences, Repeat engagements at the Joyce Theater, Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, Kennedy Center, Wolf Trap Center for the Performing Arts, the American Dance Festival, and the Harris Theater for Music and Dance have built a national reputation, Overseas invitations arrived from Brazil, Canada, France, Greece, Guatemala, Israel, and Italy, From its base in the American West, ASFB has become a player at the vanguard of its industry, Premier funders such as the National Endowment of the Arts, the Joyce Foundation,the Wolf Trap Foundation, Dance St Louis, and The Princess Grace Foundation have supported ASFB's growth, ASFB recently acted as a US State Department cultural envoy on a tour to Brazil.

138 James Blake
Twenty-four-year-old James Blake is a classically trained pianist who has quickly ascended to become a leading figure in the dubstep electronic dance music community. His unique creative output blends soul influences, gospel harmonies, and folk traditions with deep, club-like, heavy bass. Blake’s self-titled debut LP, James Blake, was awarded “Best New Music” and was ranked as the 12th best album of 2011 on Pitchfork Media’s year-end list. For his UMS performance at Michigan Theater, Blake will perform music from his critically acclaimed 2013 album Overgrown.
James Blake, a conservatory-trained pianist turned singer/songwriter andproducer, provides the vocals while performing on various keyboards and electronics. Blake builds complex vocal harmonies in tandem with vocals he records live during the concert (using foot pedals to record and loop his voice).
Twenty-five-year-old JAMES BLAKE is a classically trained pianist who has quickly ascended to become a leading figure in the dubstep and post-dubstep electronic dance music communities. His unique creative output blends soul influences, gospel harmonies, and folk traditions with deep, club-like bass. Mr. Blake's relentlessly forward-thinking approach is reflected in his enduring love of dance music. He currently leads a club night at London's Plastic People called “1-800-Dinosaur" and DJs as much as possible within his international touring schedule.Mr. Blake's self-titled debut LP, James Bloke, was awarded Best New Music" and was ranked as the 12th best album of 2011 on Pitchfork Media's year-end list. His debut sold over 400,000 copies - a feat for a record so uncompromisingly introspective and experimental. The album picked up Mercury, BRIT, and Ivor Novello award nominations and brought Mr. Blake into contact with a wide array of fans and collaborators including Joni MitchelL Jay-Z, Kanye West, Bon Iver, Bjork. Drake, Brian Eno, and The RZA.James Blake's highly anticipated second full-length album, entitled Overgrown, was released worldwide in April and won the 2013 Mercury Prize for the best British or Irish album of the year this past October.

139 Breakin' Curfew
Ann Arbor area youth raise the curtain of the Power Center to offer a rare glimpse into the performance art they create in their basements, garages, and schools, and at Ann Arbor's teen center, the Neutral Zone. Curated, produced, and marketed by local high school students, this annual event allows entrance into the lively and innovoative minds of talented young performers. The ultimate reflection of the extraordinary artistic variety that thrives in our teen community, Breakin' Curfew blends spoken word, dance, rock-and-roll, hip-hop, classical music, jazz, and much more for a single blowout extravaganza of thought-provoking musical, lyrical, and visual art. This truly one-of-a-kind show exists only in Ann Arbor, and is a paramount exhibition of southeast Michigan's most diverse teen talent.

140 Fela!
His story inspired a nation. His music inspires the world. FELA! tells the true story of the legendary Nigerian musician Fela Kuti, whose soulful Afrobeat rhythms ignited a generation. Motivated by his mother, a civil rights champion, he defied a corrupt and oppressive military government and devoted his life and music to the struggle for freedom and human dignity. FELA! is a triumphant tale of courage, passion, and love, featuring Fela Kuti’s captivating music and the visionary direction and choreography of Tony Award-winner Bill T. Jones. UMS is delighted to work in partnership with Music Hall in Detroit to bring the Tony Awardwinning, critically acclaimed musical FELA! to UMS audiences. The production had a successful 18-month run on Broadway and is currently in an open-ended run in London, with a multi-city American tour in 2012. For one performance in this three-week Detroit run, Music Hall is offering UMS audiences the very best seats on the main floor and in the mezzanine. UMS is arranging luxury coach transportation for an additional $10 per person from a location in Ann Arbor to Detroit. To order, call the UMS Ticket Office at 734-763-3100 or visit www.ums.org. UMS subscribers and donors may order by phone, in person, or online now; all other seats are available for purchase beginning Saturday, October 1, 2011. Please Note: UMS Is only holding tickets for the Sunday, February 19 matinee; all other performances will be available through Music Hall beginning October 1.

141 DC: Ballet Preljocaj
Few audience members in attendance at Ballet Preljocaj’s 2012 performances of Snow White will forget the company’s astonishing creativity and extraordinary dancing. And Then, One Thousand Years of Peace, which will be seen only at UMS and at BAM, was first created by Angelin Preljocaj for the Bolshoi Ballet in 2010 and takes inspiration from the vision of apocalypse conjured by St. John in the biblical Book of Revelation. It is, he says, about the lifting (“apo”) of the veil (“calypsis”) of things in our world that are hidden from view, rather than a depiction of biblical or global catastrophe. Set to a pulsating soundtrack, the piece combines intricate, edgy action with slow, graceful movement in an ever-evolving dance that reveals our innermost hopes, desires, and fears. “A huge, ambitious monolith of a work.”
Created in December 1984, BALLET PRELJOCAJ became the National Choreographic Centre of Champigny-sur-Marne and Val-de-Marne in 1989. In 1996, the company was welcomed at the Cite du livre in Aix-en-Provence and became the Ballet Preljocaj - National Choreographic Centre of the Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur Region, the Bouches-du-Rhone Department the Pays d'Aix Community, and the Oty of Aix-en-Provence.Since founding his company, now composed of 26 dancers, Angelin Preljocaj has created 47 choreographic works, ranging from solo to larger formations. The company performs about 100 performances per year on tour in France and abroad. His creations have been restaged by numerous other repertory companies, from which he also receives commissions to create new pieces.
Beyond repertory performances, Ballet Preljocaj has grown its local activity in Aix- en-Provence and neighboring communities in order to share its passion for dance with a broader public presenting lectures on dance interpretation through video, public rehearsals, contemporary dance classes and workshops, and dance interventions in urban public space, all means of viewing and understanding dance from different perspectives.

142 Diego - post perf
“Flamenco has to be suffered,” Diego El Cigala asserted in a New York Times interview. “How do you convey emotions from within your heart if you don’t know what suffering is? If there is no evidence of pain in your heart, there is no song.” Nicknamed “El Cigala” (Norway Lobster) for his thin frame and strong voice, Diego is an internationally celebrated Gitano flamenco singer and contemporary flamenco’s most compelling voice. His mother and father were both accomplished practitioners of flamenco, as were his grandparents. He started off singing for well-known flamenco dancers but has since “moved to the front,” which in flamenco slang means to sing on one’s own instead of accompanying a dancer. He is noted for being a pioneer in fusing flamenco with other Latin American music forms such as the bolero, Afro-Caribbean jazz, and tango. His latest project, Cigala & Tango, is the musical testimony to his concert at the legendary Teatro Gran Rex in Buenos Aires last April. The legendary Paco de Lucía says, “Diego has one of the most beautiful flamenco voices of our time, a voice of sweetness that flows over everything. When I listen to him, it warms my heart.” The New York Times adds, “He radiates a magnetic mix of winking charm and unpredictable vitriol reminiscent of a singer from an entirely different milieu, Frank Sinatra.”

